
===== PAGE 1 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Pang Wei Koh * 1 Thao Nguyen * 1 2 Yew Siang Tang * 1
Stephen Mussmann 1 Emma Pierson 1 Been Kim 2 Percy Liang 1
Abstract
We seek to learn models that we can interact with
using high-level concepts: if the model did not
think there was a bone spur in the x-ray, would
it still predict severe arthritis? State-of-the-art
models today do not typically support the manip-
ulation of concepts like “the existence of bone
spurs”, as they are trained end-to-end to go di-
rectly from raw input (e.g., pixels) to output (e.g.,
arthritis severity). We revisit the classic idea of
ﬁrst predicting concepts that are provided at train-
ing time, and then using these concepts to predict
the label. By construction, we can intervene on
these concept bottleneck models by editing their
predicted concept values and propagating these
changes to the ﬁnal prediction. On x-ray grading
and bird identiﬁcation, concept bottleneck mod-
els achieve competitive accuracy with standard
end-to-end models, while enabling interpretation
in terms of high-level clinical concepts (“bone
spurs”) or bird attributes (“wing color”). These
models also allow for richer human-model inter-
action: accuracy improves signiﬁcantly if we can
correct model mistakes on concepts at test time.
1. Introduction
Suppose that a radiologist is collaborating with a machine
learning model to grade the severity of knee osteoarthritis.
She might ask why the model made its prediction—did it
deem the space between the knee joints too narrow? Or she
might seek to intervene on the model—if she told it that the
x-ray showed a bone spur, would its prediction change?
State-of-the-art models today do not typically support such
queries: they are end-to-end models that go directly from
raw input x (e.g., pixels) to target y (e.g., arthritis severity),
*Equal contribution
1Stanford University 2Google Research.
Correspondence to: Pang Wei Koh <pangwei@cs.stanford.edu>,
Been
Kim
<beenkim@google.com>,
Percy
Liang
<pli-
ang@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au-
thor(s).
Figure 1. We study concept bottleneck models that ﬁrst predict
an intermediate set of human-speciﬁed concepts c, then use c to
predict the ﬁnal output y. We illustrate the two applications we
consider: knee x-ray grading and bird identiﬁcation.
and we cannot easily interact with them using the same
high-level concepts that practitioners reason with, like “joint
space narrowing” or “bone spurs”.
We approach this problem by revisiting the simple idea
of ﬁrst predicting an intermediate set of human-speciﬁed
concepts c like “joint space narrowing” and “bone spurs”,
then using c to predict the target y. In this paper, we refer to
such models as concept bottleneck models. These models
are trained on data points (x, c, y), where the input x is
annotated with both concepts c and target y. At test time,
they take in an input x, predict concepts ˆc, and then use
those concepts to predict the target ˆy (Figure 1).
Earlier versions of concept bottleneck models were over-
taken in predictive accuracy by end-to-end neural networks
(e.g., Kumar et al. (2009) for face recognition and Lampert
et al. (2009) for animal identiﬁcation), leading to a perceived
tradeoff between accuracy and interpretability in terms of
concepts. Recently, concept bottleneck models have started
to re-emerge as targeted tools for solving particular tasks
(Fauw et al., 2018; Yi et al., 2018; Bucher et al., 2018; Losch
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020).
arXiv:2007.04612v3  [cs.LG]  29 Dec 2020

===== PAGE 2 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
In this paper, we propose a straightforward method for turn-
ing any end-to-end neural network into a concept bottleneck
model, given concept annotations at training time: we sim-
ply resize one of the layers to match the number of concepts
provided, and add an intermediate loss that encourages the
neurons in that layer to align component-wise to the pro-
vided concepts. We show that concept bottleneck models
trained in this manner can achieve task accuracies competi-
tive with or even higher than standard models. We empha-
size that concept annotations are not needed at test time;
the model predicts the concepts, then uses the predicted
concepts to make a ﬁnal prediction.
Importantly—and unlike standard models—these bottleneck
models allow us to intervene on concepts by editing the
concept predictions ˆc and propagating those changes to
the target prediction ˆy. Interventions enable richer human-
model interaction: e.g., if the radiologist realizes that what
the model thinks is a bone spur is actually an artifact, she
can update the model’s prediction by directly changing the
corresponding value of ˆc. When we simulate this injection of
human knowledge by partially correcting concept mistakes
that the model makes at test time, we ﬁnd that accuracy
improves substantially beyond that of a standard model.
Interventions also make concept bottleneck models inter-
pretable in terms of high-level concepts: by manipulating
concepts ˆc and observing the model’s response, we can ob-
tain counterfactual explanations like “if the model did not
think the joint space was too narrow for this patient, then it
would not have predicted severe arthritis”. In contrast, prior
work on explaining end-to-end models in terms of high-level
concepts has been restricted to post-hoc interpretation of
already-trained models: e.g., predicting concepts from hid-
den layers (Kim et al., 2018) or measuring the correlation
of individual neurons with concepts (Bau et al., 2017).
The validity of interventions on a model depends on the
alignment between its predicted concepts ˆc and the true
concepts c. We can estimate this alignment by measuring
the model’s concept accuracy on a held-out validation set
(Fong & Vedaldi, 2017).1 A model with perfect concept
accuracy across all possible inputs makes predictions ˆc that
align with the true concepts c. Conversely, if a model has
low concept accuracy, then the model’s predictions ˆc need
not match with the true concepts, and we would not expect
interventions to lead to meaningful results.
Contributions. We systematically study variants of con-
cept bottleneck models and contrast them with standard
end-to-end models in different settings, with a focus on the
previously-unexplored ability of concept bottleneck models
to support concept interventions. Our goal is to characterize
1With the usual caveats of measuring accuracy: in practice, the
validation set might be skewed such that models that learn spurious
correlations can still achieve high concept accuracy.
concept bottleneck models more fully: Is there a tradeoff
between task accuracy and concept interpretability? Do
interventions at test time help model accuracy, and is con-
cept accuracy a good indicator of the ability to effectively
intervene? Do different ways of training bottleneck models
lead to signiﬁcantly different outcomes in intervention?
We evaluate concept bottleneck models on the two appli-
cations in Figure 1: the osteoarthritis grading task (Nevitt
et al., 2006) and a ﬁne-grained bird species identiﬁcation
task (Wah et al., 2011). On these, we show that bottleneck
models are comparable to standard end-to-end models while
also attaining high concept accuracies. In contrast, the con-
cepts cannot be predicted with high accuracy from linear
combinations of neurons in a standard black-box model,
making it difﬁcult to do post-hoc interpretation in terms of
concepts like in Kim et al. (2018). We demonstrate that we
can substantially improve model accuracy by intervening
on these bottleneck models at test time to correct model
mistakes on concepts, and we show that different methods
of training bottleneck models lead to different trade-offs be-
tween task accuracy with and without interventions. Finally,
we show that bottleneck models guided to learn the right
concepts can also be more robust to covariate shifts.
2. Related work
Concept bottleneck models. Models that bottleneck on
human-speciﬁed concepts—where the model ﬁrst predicts
the concepts, then uses only those predicted concepts to
make a ﬁnal prediction—have been previously used for
speciﬁc applications (Kumar et al., 2009; Lampert et al.,
2009). Early versions did not use end-to-end neural net-
works, which soon overtook them in predictive accuracy.
Consequently, bottleneck models have historically been
more popular for few-shot learning settings, where shared
concepts might allow generalization to unseen contexts,
rather than the standard supervised setting we consider here.
More recently, deep neural networks with concept bottle-
necks have re-emerged as targeted tools for solving par-
ticular tasks, e.g., Fauw et al. (2018) for retinal disease
diagnosis, Yi et al. (2018) for visual question-answering,
and Bucher et al. (2018) for content-based image retrieval.
Losch et al. (2019) and Chen et al. (2020) also explore
learning concept-based models via auxiliary datasets.
Feature engineering. Constructing a concept bottleneck
model is similar to traditional feature engineering (Lewis,
1992; Zheng & Casari, 2018; Nixon & Aguado, 2019) in
that both require specifying intermediate concepts/features.
However, they differ in an important way: in the former,
we learn mappings from raw input to high-level concepts,
whereas in the latter, we construct low-level features that can
be computed from the raw input by handwritten functions.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Concepts as auxiliary losses or features. Non-bottleneck
models that use human-speciﬁed concepts commonly use
them in auxiliary objectives in a multi-task setup, or as aux-
iliary features; examples include using object parts (Huang
et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2018), parse trees (Zelenko et al.,
2003; Bunescu & Mooney, 2005), or natural language ex-
planations (Murty et al., 2020). However, these models do
not support intervention on concepts. For instance, consider
a multi-task model c ←x →y, with the concepts c used
in an auxiliary loss; simply intervening on ˆc at test time
will not affect the model’s prediction of y. Interventions do
affect models that use c as auxiliary features by ﬁrst predict-
ing x →c and then predicting (x, c) →y (e.g., Sutton &
McCallum (2005)), but we cannot intervene in isolation on
a single concept because of the side channel from x →y.
Causal models. We emphasize that we study interventions
on the value of a predicted concept within the model, not on
that concept in reality. In other words, we are interested in
how changing the model’s predicted concept values ˆc would
affect its ﬁnal prediction ˆy, and not in whether intervening
on the true concept value c in reality would actually affect
the true label y. This is similar to the notion of causality
explored by other concept-based interpretability methods,
e.g., in Goyal et al. (2019) and O’Shaughnessy et al. (2020).
More broadly, many others have studied learning models
of actual causal relationships in the world (Pearl, 2000).
While concept bottleneck models can represent causal re-
lationships between x →c →y if the set of concepts c
is chosen appropriately, they have the advantage of being
ﬂexible and do not require c to cause y. For example, imag-
ine that arthritis grade (y) is highly correlated with swelling
(c). In this case, c does not cause y (hypothetically, if one
could directly induce swelling in the patient, it would not
affect whether they had osteoarthritis). However, concept
bottleneck models can still exploit the fact that c is highly
predictive for y, and intervening on the model by replacing
the predicted concept value ˆc with the true value c can still
improve accuracy, even if c does not cause y.
Post-hoc concept analysis. Many methods have been de-
veloped to interpret models post-hoc, including recent work
on using human-speciﬁed concepts to generate explana-
tions (Bau et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2018;
Ghorbani et al., 2019). These techniques rely on models
automatically learning those concepts despite not having
explicit knowledge of them, and can be particularly useful
when paired with models that attempt to learn more inter-
pretable representations (Bengio et al., 2013; Chen et al.,
2016; Higgins et al., 2017; Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). How-
ever, post-hoc methods can fail when the models do not
learn these concepts, and also do not admit straightforward
interventions on concepts. In this work, we instead directly
guide models to learn these concepts at training time.
3. Setup
Consider predicting a target y ∈R from input x ∈Rd; for
simplicity, we present regression ﬁrst and discuss classiﬁca-
tion later. We observe training points {(x(i), y(i), c(i))}n
i=1,
where c ∈Rk is a vector of k concepts. We consider bot-
tleneck models of the form f(g(x)), where g : Rd →Rk
maps an input x into the concept space (“bone spurs”, etc.),
and f : Rk →R maps concepts into a ﬁnal prediction
(“arthritis severity”). We call these concept bottleneck mod-
els because their prediction ˆy = f(g(x)) relies on the input
x entirely through the bottleneck ˆc = g(x), which we train
to align component-wise to the concepts c. We deﬁne task
accuracy as how accurately f(g(x)) predicts y, and concept
accuracy as how accurately g(x) predicts c (averaged over
each concept). We will refer to g(·) as predicting x →c,
and to f(·) as predicting c →y.
In our work, we systematically study different ways of learn-
ing concept bottleneck models. Let LCj : R × R →R+ be
a loss function that measures the discrepancy between the
predicted and true j-th concept, and let LY : R × R →R+
measure the discrepancy between predicted and true tar-
gets. We consider the following ways to learn a concept
bottleneck model ( ˆf, ˆg):
1. The independent bottleneck learns ˆf and ˆg indepen-
dently: ˆf = arg minf
P
i LY (f(c(i)); y(i)), and ˆg =
arg ming
P
i,j LCj(gj(x(i)); c(i)
j ). While ˆf is trained
using the true c, at test time it still takes ˆg(x) as input.
2. The sequential bottleneck ﬁrst learns ˆg in the same way
as above. It then uses the concept predictions ˆg(x) to
learn ˆf = arg minf
P
i LY (f(ˆg(x(i))); y(i)).
3. The joint bottleneck minimizes the weighted sum
ˆf, ˆg
=
arg minf,g
P
i

LY (f(g(x(i))); y(i)) +
P
j λLCj(g(x(i)); c(i))

for some λ > 0.
As a control,
we also study the standard model,
which ignores concepts and directly minimizes ˆf, ˆg =
arg minf,g
P
i LY (f(g(x(i))); y(i)).
The hyperparameter λ in the joint bottleneck controls the
tradeoff between concept vs. task loss. The standard model
is equivalent to taking λ →0, while the sequential bot-
tleneck can be viewed as taking λ →∞. Compared to
independent bottlenecks, sequential bottlenecks allow the
c →y part of the model to adapt to how well it can pre-
dict x →c; and joint bottlenecks further allow the model’s
version of the concepts to be reﬁned to improve predictive
performance.
We propose a simple scheme to turn an end-to-end neural
network into a concept bottleneck model: simply resize

===== PAGE 4 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Table 1. Task errors with ±2SD over random seeds. Overall, in-
dependent, sequential, and joint concept bottleneck models are
comparable to standard end-to-end models on task error. Remov-
ing the bottleneck from the standard model (“no bottleneck”) does
not signiﬁcantly affect task error. Multi-task learning on the stan-
dard models further improves task error, but does not allow for
interventions.
MODEL
y RMSE (OAI)
y ERROR (CUB)
INDEPENDENT
0.435± 0.024
0.240±0.012
SEQUENTIAL
0.418± 0.004
0.243±0.006
JOINT
0.418± 0.004
0.199±0.006
STANDARD
0.441± 0.006
0.175±0.008
NO BOTTLENECK
0.443 ± 0.008
0.173±0.003
MULTITASK
0.425± 0.010
0.162±0.002
one of its layers to have k neurons to match the number of
concepts k, then choose one of the training schemes above.
Classiﬁcation. In classiﬁcation, f and g compute real-
valued scores (e.g., concept logits ˆℓ= ˆg(x) ∈Rk) that
we then turn into a probabilistic prediction (e.g., P(ˆcj =
1) = σ(ˆℓj) for logistic regression). This does not change
the independent bottleneck, since f is directly trained on
the binary-valued c. For the sequential and joint bottle-
necks, we connect f to the logits ˆℓ, i.e., we compute
P(ˆcj = 1) = σ(ˆgj(x)) and P(ˆy = 1) = σ( ˆf(ˆg(x))).
4. Benchmarking bottleneck model accuracy
We start by showing that concept bottleneck models achieve
both competitive task accuracy and high concept accuracy.
While this is necessary for bottleneck models to be viable in
practice, their strength is that we can interpret and intervene
on them; we explore those aspects in Sections 5 and 6.
4.1. Applications
We consider an x-ray grading and a bird identiﬁcation task.
Their corresponding datasets are annotated with high-level
concepts that practitioners (radiologists/birders) use to rea-
son about their decisions. (Dataset details in Appendix A.)
X-ray grading (OAI). We use knee x-rays from the Os-
teoarthritis Initiative (OAI) (Nevitt et al., 2006), which com-
piles radiological and clinical data on patients at risk of
knee osteoarthritis (Figure 1-Top; n = 36, 369 data points).
Given an x-ray, the task is to predict the Kellgren-Lawrence
grade (KLG), a 4-level ordinal variable assessed by radiolo-
gists that measures the severity of osteoarthritis, with higher
scores denoting more severe disease.2 As concepts, we use
k = 10 ordinal variables describing joint space narrow-
ing, bone spurs, calciﬁcation, etc.; these clinical concepts
2Due to technicalities in the data collection protocol, we use a
modiﬁed version of KLG where the ﬁrst two grades are combined.
Table 2. Average concept errors. Bottleneck models have lower
error than linear probes on standard and SENN models.
MODEL
c RMSE (OAI)
c ERROR (CUB)
INDEPENDENT
0.529±0.004
0.034±0.002
SEQUENTIAL
0.527±0.004
0.034±0.002
JOINT
0.543±0.014
0.031±0.000
STANDARD [PROBE]
0.680±0.038
0.093±0.004
SENN [PROBE]
0.676±0.026
-
are also assessed by radiologists and used directly in the
assessment of KLG (Kellgren & Lawrence, 1957).
Bird identiﬁcation (CUB). We use the Caltech-UCSD
Birds-200-2011 (CUB) dataset (Wah et al., 2011), which
comprises n = 11, 788 bird photographs (Figure 1-Bot).
The task is to classify the correct bird species out of 200
possible options. As concepts, we use k = 112 binary bird
attributes representing wing color, beak shape, etc. Because
the provided concepts are noisy (see Appendix A), we de-
noise them by majority voting, e.g., if more than 50% of
crows have black wings in the data, then we set all crows
to have black wings. In other words, we use class-level
concepts and assume that all birds of the same species in the
training data share the same concept annotations. In contrast,
the OAI dataset uses instance-level concepts: examples with
the same y can have different concept annotations c.
Models. For each task, we construct concept bottleneck
models by adopting model architectures and hyperparam-
eters from previous high-performing approaches; see Ap-
pendix B for experimental details. For the joint bottleneck
model, we search over the task-concept tradeoff hyperpa-
rameter λ and report results for the model that has the high-
est task accuracy while maintaining high concept accuracy
on the validation set (λ = 1 for OAI and λ = 0.01 for
CUB). We model x-ray grading as a regression problem
(minimizing mean squared error) on both the KLG target y
and concepts c, following Pierson et al. (2019); we learn g,
which goes from x →c, by ﬁne-tuning a pretrained ResNet-
18 model (He et al., 2016), and we learn f, which goes from
c →y, by training a small 3-layer multi-layer perceptron.
We model bird identiﬁcation as multi-class classiﬁcation for
the species y and binary classiﬁcation for the concepts c.
Following Cui et al. (2018), we learn g by ﬁne-tuning an
Inception-v3 network (Szegedy et al., 2016), and learn f by
training a single linear layer (i.e., logistic regression).
4.2. Task and concept accuracies
Table 1 shows that concept bottleneck models achieve com-
parable task accuracy to standard black-box models on both
tasks, despite the bottleneck constraint (all numbers reported
are on a held-out test set). On OAI, joint and sequential
bottlenecks are actually better in root mean square error

===== PAGE 5 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Figure 2. Left: The shaded regions show the optimal frontier between task vs. concept error. On OAI, we ﬁnd little trade-off; models can
do well on both task and concept prediction. On CUB, there is some trade-off, with standard models and joint models that prioritize task
prediction (i.e., with sufﬁciently low λ) having lower task error. For standard models, we plot the concept error of the mean predictor
(OAI) or random predictor (CUB). Mid: Histograms of how accurate individual concepts are, averaged over multiple random seeds. In
our tasks, each individual concept can be accurately predicted by bottleneck models. Right: Data efﬁciency curves. Especially on OAI,
bottleneck models can achieve the same task accuracy as standard models with many fewer training points.
(RMSE) than the standard model,3 and on CUB, sequential
and independent bottlenecks are worse in 0-1 error than the
standard model, though the joint model (which is allowed
to modify the concepts to improve task performance) closes
most of the gap.
At the same time, the bottleneck models are able to accu-
rately predict each concept well (Figure 2), and they achieve
low average error across all concepts (Table 2). As discussed
in Section 1, low concept error suggests that the model’s
concepts are aligned with the true concepts, which in turn
suggests that we might intervene effectively on them; we
will explore this in Section 6.
Overall, we do not observe a tradeoff between high task
accuracy and high concept accuracy: pulling the bottleneck
layer towards the concepts c does not substantially affect
the model’s ability to predict y in our tasks, even when the
bottleneck is trained jointly. We illustrate this in Figure 2-
Left, which plots the task vs. concept errors of each model.
Additional baselines. We ran two further baselines to de-
termine if the bottleneck architecture impacted model per-
formance. First, standard models in the literature generally
3To contextualize RMSE, our modiﬁed KLG ranges from 0-3,
and average Pearson correlations between each predicted and true
concept are ≥0.87 for all bottleneck models.
do not use architectures that have a bottleneck layer with
exactly k units, so we trained a variant of the standard model
without that bottleneck layer (directly using a ResNet-18
or Inception-v3 model to predict x →y); this performed
similarly to the standard bottleneck model (“Standard, no
bottleneck” in Table 1). Second, we tested a typical multi-
task setup using an auxiliary loss to encourage the activa-
tions of the last layer to be predictive of the concepts c,
hyperparameter searching across different weightings of
this auxiliary loss. These models also performed compara-
bly (“Multitask” in Table 1), but since they do not support
concept interventions, we focus on comparing standard vs.
concept bottleneck models in the rest of the paper.
Data efﬁciency. Another way to benchmark different mod-
els is by measuring data efﬁciency, i.e., how many training
points they need for a desired level of accuracy. To study
this, we subsampled the training and validation data and
retrained each model (details in Appendix B.4). Concept
bottleneck models are particularly effective on OAI: the
sequential bottleneck model with ≈25% of the full dataset
performs similarly to the standard model. On CUB, the joint
bottleneck and standard models are more accurate through-
out, with the joint model slightly more accurate in lower
data regimes (Figure 2-Right).

===== PAGE 6 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
5. Benchmarking post-hoc concept analysis
Concept bottleneck models are trained to have a bottleneck
layer that aligns component-wise with the human-speciﬁed
concepts c. For any test input x, we can read out predicted
concepts directly from the bottleneck layer, as well as inter-
vene on concepts by manipulating the predicted concepts
ˆc and inspecting how the ﬁnal prediction ˆy changes. This
enables explanations like “if the model did not think the
joint space was too narrow for this patient, then it would not
have predicted severe arthritis”. An alternative approach to
interpreting models in terms of concepts is post-hoc analy-
sis: take an existing model trained to directly predict x →y
without any concepts, and use a probe to recover the known
concepts from the model’s activations. For example, Bau
et al. (2017) measure the correlation of individual neurons
with concepts, while Kim et al. (2018) use a linear probe to
predict concepts with linear combinations of neurons.
A necessary condition for post-hoc interpretation is high
concept accuracy. In this section, we therefore evaluate
how accurately linear probes can predict concepts post-hoc.
We emphasize that this is a necessary but not sufﬁcient
condition for accurate post-hoc interpretations, as post-hoc
analysis does not enable interventions on concepts: even
if we ﬁnd a linear combination of neurons that predicts
a concept well, it is unclear how to modify the model’s
activations to change what it thinks of that concept alone.
Without this ability to intervene, interpretations in terms of
concepts are suggestive but fraught: even if we can say that
“the model thinks the joint space is narrow”, it is hard to
test if that actually affects its ﬁnal prediction. This is an
important limitation of post-hoc interpretation, though we
will set it aside for this section.
Following Kim et al. (2018), we trained a linear probe to
predict each concept from the layers of the standard model
(see Appendix B). We found that these linear probes have
lower concept accuracy compared to simply reading con-
cepts out from a bottleneck model (Table 2). On OAI, the
best-performing linear probe achieved an average concept
RMSE of 0.68, vs. 0.53 in the bottleneck models; average
Pearson correlation dropped to 0.72 from 0.84. On CUB,
the linear probe achieved an average concept error of 0.09
instead of 0.03; average F1 score dropped to 0.77 from 0.92.
We also tested if we could predict concepts post-hoc from
models designed to learn an interpretable mapping from
x →y. Speciﬁcally, we evaluated self-explaining neu-
ral networks (SENN) (Melis & Jaakkola, 2018). As with
standard models, SENN does not use any pre-speciﬁed con-
cepts; it learns an input representation encouraged to be
interpretable through diversity and smoothness constraints.
However, linear probes on SENN also had lower concept
accuracy on OAI (0.68 concept RMSE; see Appendix B).4
The comparative difﬁculty in predicting concepts post-hoc
suggests that if we have prior knowledge of what concepts
practitioners would use, then it helps to directly train models
with these concepts instead of hoping to recover them from
a model trained without knowledge of these concepts. See
Chen et al. (2020) for a related discussion.
6. Test-time intervention
The ability to intervene on concept bottleneck models en-
ables human users to have richer interactions with them. For
example, if a radiologist disagrees with a model’s prediction,
she would not only be able to inspect the predicted concepts,
but also simulate how the model would respond to changes
in those predicted concepts. This kind of test-time interven-
tion can be particularly useful in high-stakes settings like
medicine, or in other settings where it is easier for users to
identify the concepts c (e.g., wing color) than the target y
(exact species of bird).
We envision that in practice, domain experts interacting
with the model could intervene to “ﬁx” potentially incorrect
concept values predicted by the model. To study this setting,
we use an oracle that can query the true value of any concept
for a test input. Figure 3 shows examples of interventions
that lead to the model making a correct prediction.
6.1. Intervening on OAI
Recall that concept bottleneck models ﬁrst predict concept
values ˆc from the input x, and then use those predicted
concept values to predict the target ˆy. On OAI, we deﬁne
intervening on the j-th concept as replacing ˆcj with its
true value cj, as provided by the oracle, and then updating
the prediction ˆy after this replacement. Similarly, we can
intervene on multiple concepts by simultaneously replacing
all of their corresponding predicted concept values, and then
updating the prediction. (Intervening on CUB, which we
describe in the next subsection, is similar but slightly more
complicated because of its regression setting.)
Concretely, we iteratively select concepts on which to inter-
vene on, using an input-independent ordering over concepts
computed from the held-out validation set. This means
that we always intervene on the same concept ci1 ﬁrst, fol-
lowed by intervening on both ci1 and ci2, and so on (see
Appendix B for more detail).
We found that test-time intervention in this manner sig-
niﬁcantly improved task accuracy on OAI: e.g., querying
for just 2 concepts reduces task RMSE from >0.4 to ≈0.3
4We were unable to run SENN on CUB because the default
implementation was too memory-intensive; CUB has many more
classes/concepts than the tasks SENN was originally used for.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Figure 3. Successful examples of test-time intervention, where intervening on a single concept corrects the model prediction. Here, we
show examples from independent bottleneck models. Right: For CUB, we intervene on concept groups instead of individual binary
concepts. The sample birds on the right illustrate how the intervened concept distinguishes between the original and new predictions.
Figure 4. Test-time intervention results. Left: Intervention substantially improves task accuracy, except for the control model, which
is a joint model that heavily prioritizes label accuracy over concept accuracy. Mid: Replacing c →y with a linear model degrades
effectiveness. Right: Intervention improves task accuracy except for the joint model. Connecting c →y to probabilities rescues
intervention but degrades normal accuracy.
(Figure 4-Left). These results hint that a single radiologist
collaborating with bottleneck models might be able to out-
perform either the radiologist or model alone, since the con-
cept values used for intervention mostly come from a single
radiologist instead of a consensus reading (see Appendix A),
and neural networks similar to ours are comparable with
individual radiologist performance in terms of agreement
with the consensus grade (Tiulpin et al., 2018; Pierson et al.,
2019). However, deﬁnitively showing this would require
more careful human studies.
Furthermore, we found a trade-off between intervenability
and task accuracy: the independent bottleneck achieved bet-
ter test error when all k = 10 concepts are replaced than the
sequential or joint bottlenecks, but performed slightly worse
without any intervention (Figure 4-Left). This behavior is
consistent with how these different bottleneck models are
trained. Recall that in the independent bottleneck, c →y
is trained using the true c, which is what we replace the
predicted concepts ˆc with. In contrast, in the sequential and
joint models, c →y is trained using the predicted ˆc, which
in general will have a different distribution from the true c.
Without any interventions, we might therefore expect the
independent bottleneck to perform worse, as at test time, it
receives the distribution over the predicted ˆc instead of the
distribution of the true c that it was trained with. However,
when all concepts are replaced, the reverse is true.
To better understand what inﬂuences intervention effective-
ness, we ran two ablations. First, we found that intervention
can fail in joint models when we prioritize ﬁtting y over c
too much (i.e., when λ is too small). Speciﬁcally, the joint
model with λ = 0.01 learned a concept representation that
was not as well-aligned with the true concepts, and replac-
ing ˆc with the true c at test time slightly increased test error
(“control” model in Figure 4-Left). Second, we changed the

===== PAGE 8 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
c →y model from the 3-layer multi-layer perceptron used
throughout the paper to a single linear layer. Surprisingly,
test-time intervention was less effective here compared to
the non-linear counterparts (Figure 4-Mid), even though
task and concept accuracies were similar before interven-
tion (concept RMSEs of the sequential and independent
models are not even affected by the change in c →y). It is
unclear to us why a linear c →y model should be worse at
handling interventions, and this observation warrants further
investigation in future work.
Altogether, these results suggest that task and concept accu-
racies alone are insufﬁcient for determining how effective
test-time intervention will be on a model. Different induc-
tive biases in different models control how effectively they
can handle distribution shifts from ˆc →y (pre-intervention)
to c →y (post-intervention). Even without this distribution
shift, as in the case of the linear vs. non-linear independent
bottlenecks, the expressivity of c →y has a large effect on
intervention effectiveness. Moreover, it is possible that the
average concept accuracy masks differences in individual
concept accuracies that inﬂuence these results.
6.2. Intervening on CUB
Intervention on CUB is complicated by the fact that it is
classiﬁcation instead of regression. Recall from Section 3
that for sequential and joint bottleneck classiﬁers, the ﬁnal
predictor f takes in the predicted concept logits ˆℓ= ˆg(x)
instead of the predicted binary concepts ˆc. To intervene on
a concept ˆcj, we therefore cannot directly copy over the
true cj. Instead, we need to alter the logits ˆℓj such that
P(ˆcj = 1) = σ(ˆℓj) is close to the true cj. Concretely, we
intervene on ˆcj by setting ˆℓj to the 5th (if cj = 0) or 95th
(if cj = 1) percentile of ˆℓj over the training distribution.
Another difference is that for CUB, we group related con-
cepts and intervene on them together. This is because many
of the concepts encode the same underlying property, e.g.,
c1 = 1 if the wing is red, c2 = 1 if the wing is black, etc.
We assume that the human (oracle) returns the true wing
color in a single query, instead of only answering yes/no
questions about the wing color; see Figure 4-Right.
An important caveat is that we use denoised class-level con-
cepts in the CUB dataset (Section 4.1). To avoid unrealistic
scenarios where a bird part is not visible in the image but
we still ‘intervene’ on it, we only replace a concept value
with the true concept value if that concept is actually vis-
ible in the image (visibility information is included in the
dataset). The results here are nonetheless still optimistic, be-
cause they assume that human experts do not make mistakes
in identifying concepts and that birds of the same species
always share the same concept values.
Test-time intervention substantially improved accuracy on
Table 3. Task and concept error with background shifts. Bottleneck
models have substantially lower task error than the standard model.
MODEL
y ERROR
c ERROR
STANDARD
0.627±0.013
-
JOINT
0.482±0.018
0.069±0.002
SEQUENTIAL
0.496±0.009
0.072±0.002
INDEPENDENT
0.482±0.008
0.072±0.002
CUB bottleneck models (Figure 4-Right), though it took
intervention on several concept groups to see a large gain.
For simplicity, we queried concept groups in random order,
which means that many queries were probably irrelevant for
any given test example.5
As with OAI, test-time intervention was more effective on
independent bottleneck models than on the sequential and
joint models (Figure 4-Right). We hypothesize that this is
partially due to the ad-hoc fashion in which we set logits
to the 5th or 95th percentiles for the latter models. To
study this, we trained a joint bottleneck with the same task-
concept tradeoff λ but with the ﬁnal predictor f connected
to the probabilities P( ˆcj = 1) = σ(ˆℓj) instead of the logits
ˆℓj. We show the performance of this model under test-time
intervention as the “Joint, from sigmoid” curve in Figure 4-
Right. It had a higher task error of 0.224 vs. 0.199 with
the normal joint model; we suspect that the squashing from
the sigmoid makes optimization harder. However, test-time
intervention worked better, and it is more straightforward as
we can directly edit ˆc instead of having to arbitrarily choose
a percentile for the logits ˆℓ. This raises the question of how
to effectively intervene in the classiﬁcation setting while
maintaining the computational advantages of avoiding the
sigmoid in the c →y connection.
7. Robustness to background shifts
Finally, we investigate if concept bottleneck models can be
more robust than standard models to spurious correlations
that hold in the training distribution but not the test distri-
bution. For example, in the bird recognition task, a model
might spuriously associate the image background with the
label and therefore make more errors if the relationship be-
tween the background and label changes. However, if the
relationship between the concepts and the label remains in-
variant, then one might hope that concept bottleneck models
might still perform well under this change.
To test this, we constructed the TravelingBirds dataset, a
5This differs from OAI, which used a ﬁxed ordering computed
on a held-out validation set. For CUB, it is common to retrain the
model on the training + validation set after the hyperparameter
search, which makes it difﬁcult to subsequently use the held-out
validation set. See Appendix B for more details.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Figure 5. In the TravelingBirds dataset, we change the image back-
grounds associated with each class from train to test time (illus-
trated above for a single class).
variant of the CUB dataset where the target y is spuriously
correlated with image background in the training set. Specif-
ically, we cropped each bird out of its original background
(using segmentation masks from the original dataset) and
onto a new background from the Places dataset (Zhou et al.,
2017), with each bird class (species) assigned to a unique
and randomly-selected category of places. At test time, we
shufﬂe this mapping, so each class is associated with a dif-
ferent category of places. For example, at training time, all
robins might be pictured against the sky, but at test time they
might all be on grassy plains (Figure 5).6
The results on TravelingBirds are shown in Table 3. Concept
bottleneck models do better than standard models: they rely
less on background features, since each concept is shared
among multiple bird classes and thus appears in training
data points that span multiple background types, reducing
the correlation between the concept and the background.
On the other hand, standard models that go straight from
the input x to the label y leverage the spurious correlation
between background and label, and consequently fail on the
shifted test set.
This toy experiment shows that concept bottleneck models
can be more robust to spurious correlations when the target
y is more correlated with training data artifacts compared
to the concepts c. We emphasize that whether bottleneck
models are more robust depends on the choice of the set
6TravelingBirds is constructed in a similar manner to the Wa-
terbirds dataset introduced in Sagawa et al. (2020). In Waterbirds,
which was designed to benchmark methods for handling group
shifts, the classes are collapsed into just two classes (waterbirds
and landbirds), and only land or water backgrounds are used. In
TravelingBirds, which is a more adversarial setting, we retain the
multi-class labels, use a larger set of backgrounds, and change the
test distribution so that the relationship between the backgrounds
and labels are completely altered.
of concepts c and the shifts considered; a priori, we do not
expect that an arbitrary set of concepts c will lead to a more
robust model.
8. Discussion
Concept bottleneck models can compete on task accuracy
while supporting intervention and interpretation, allowing
practitioners to reason about these models in terms of high-
level concepts they are familiar with, and enabling more
effective human-model collaboration through test-time in-
tervention. We believe that these models can be promising
in settings like medicine, where the high stakes incentivize
human experts to collaborate with models at test time, and
where the tasks are often normatively deﬁned with respect to
a set of standard concepts (e.g., “osteoarthritis is marked by
the presence of bone spurs”). A ﬂurry of recent papers have
used similar human concepts for post-hoc interpretation of
medical and other scientiﬁc ML models, e.g., Graziani et al.
(2018) for breast cancer histopathology; Clough et al. (2019)
for cardiac MRIs; and Sprague et al. (2019) for meteorol-
ogy (storm prediction). We expect that concept bottleneck
models can be applied directly to similar settings.
A drawback of concept bottleneck models is that they re-
quire annotated concepts at training time. However, if the
set of concepts are good enough, then fewer training exam-
ples might be required to achieve a desired accuracy level
(as in OAI). This allows model developers to trade off the
cost of acquiring more detailed annotations against the cost
of acquiring new training examples, which can be helpful
when new training examples are expensive to acquire, e.g.,
in medical settings where adding training points might entail
invasive/expensive procedures on patients, but the incremen-
tal cost in asking a doctor to add annotations to data points
that they already need to look at might be lower.
Below, we discuss several directions for future work.
Learning concepts. In tasks that are not normatively de-
ﬁned, we can learn the right concepts by interactively query-
ing humans. For example, Cheng & Bernstein (2015) asked
crowdworkers to generate concepts to differentiate between
adaptively-chosen pairs of examples, and used those con-
cepts to train models to recognize the artist of a painting, tell
honest from deceptive reviews, and identify popular jokes.
Similar methods can also be used to reﬁne existing concepts
and make them more discriminative (Duan et al., 2012).
Side channel from x →y. We can also account for having
an incomplete set of concepts by adding a direct side chan-
nel from x →y to a bottleneck model. This is equivalent
to using the concepts as auxiliary features, and as discussed
in Section 2, has the drawback that we cannot cleanly in-
tervene on a single concept, since the x →y connection
might also be implicitly reasoning about that concept. De-

===== PAGE 10 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
vising approaches to mitigate this issue would allow concept
models to have high task accuracy even with an incomplete
set of concepts; for example, one might consider carefully
regularizing the x →y connection or using some sort of
adversarial loss to prevent it from using existing concepts.
Theoretically analyzing concept bottlenecks. In OAI, we
found that concept bottleneck models outperform standard
models on task accuracy. Better understanding when and
why this happens can inform how we collect concepts or
design the architecture of bottleneck models. As an exam-
ple of what this could entail, we sketch an analysis of a
simple well-speciﬁed linear regression setting, where we
assume that the input x ∈Rd is normally distributed, and
that the concepts c ∈Rk and the target y ∈R are noisy
linear transformations of x and c respectively. Our analysis
suggests that in this setting, concept bottleneck models can
be particularly effective when the number of concepts k
is much smaller than the input dimension d and when the
concepts have relatively low noise compared to the target.
Concretely, we compared an independent bottleneck model
(two linear regression problems for x →c and c →y) to
a standard model (a single linear regression problem) by
deriving the ratio of their excess mean-squared-errors as the
number of training points n goes to inﬁnity:
Excess error for indp bottleneck model
Excess error for standard model
≤
k
dσ2
Y + σ2
C
σ2
Y + σ2
C
,
where σ2
C and σ2
Y are the variances of the noise in the con-
cepts c and target y, respectively. See Appendix C for a
formal statement and proof. The asymptotic relative ex-
cess error is small when k
d is small and σ2
Y ≫σ2
C, i.e.,
when the number of concepts is much smaller than the input
dimension and the concepts are less noisy than the target.
Intervention effectiveness. Our exploration of the design
space of concept bottleneck models showed that the train-
ing method (independent, sequential, joint) and choice of
architecture inﬂuence not just the task and concept accura-
cies, but also how effective interventions are. This poses
several open questions, for example: What factors drive
the effectiveness of test-time interventions? Could adap-
tive strategies that query for the concepts that maximize
expected information gain on a particular test example make
interventions more effective? Finally, how might we have
models learn from interventions to avoid making similar
mistakes in the future?
Reproducibility
The code for replicating our experiments is available
on GitHub at https://github.com/yewsiang/
ConceptBottleneck. An executable version of the
CUB experiments in this paper is on CodaLab at https:
//worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/
0x362911581fcd4e048ddfd84f47203fd2.
The
TravelingBirds dataset can also be downloaded at that
link.
While we are unable to release the OAI dataset
publicly, an application to access the data can be made at
https://nda.nih.gov/oai/.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Jesse Mu, Justin Cheng, Kensen Shi,
Michael Bernstein, Rui Shu, Sendhil Mullainathan, Shyamal
Buch, Yair Carmon, Ziad Obermeyer, and our anonymous
reviewers for helpful advice. PWK was supported by a
Facebook PhD Fellowship. YST was supposed by an IMDA
Singapore Digital Scholarship. SM was supported by an
NSF Graduate Fellowship. EP was supported by a Hertz
Fellowship. Other funding came from the PECASE Award.
Toyota Research Institute (“TRI”) provided funds to assist
the authors with their research but this article solely reﬂects
the opinions and conclusions of its authors and not TRI or
any other Toyota entity.
References
Bau, D., Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Oliva, A., and Torralba, A.
Network dissection: Quantifying interpretability of deep
visual representations. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6541–6549, 2017.
Bengio, Y., Courville, A., and Vincent, P. Representation
learning: A review and new perspectives. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35
(8):1798–1828, 2013.
Bucher, M., Herbin, S., and Jurie, F. Semantic bottleneck for
computer vision tasks. In Asian Conference on Computer
Vision, pp. 695–712, 2018.
Bunescu, R. C. and Mooney, R. J.
A shortest path de-
pendency kernel for relation extraction. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
724–731, 2005.
Chen, X., Duan, Y., Houthooft, R., Schulman, J., Sutskever,
I., and Abbeel, P. InfoGAN: Interpretable representation
learning by information maximizing generative adversar-
ial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Chen, Z., Bei, Y., and Rudin, C.
Concept whitening
for interpretable image recognition.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.01650, 2020.
Cheng, J. and Bernstein, M. S.
Flock: Hybrid Crowd-
Machine learning classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing, pp. 600–611, 2015.
Clough, J. R., Oksuz, I., Puyol-Ant´on, E., Ruijsink, B.,
King, A. P., and Schnabel, J. A. Global and local inter-
pretability for cardiac MRI classiﬁcation. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, pp. 656–664, 2019.
Cui, Y., Song, Y., Sun, C., Howard, A., and Belongie,
S. Large scale ﬁne-grained categorization and domain-
speciﬁc transfer learning. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4109–4118, 2018.
Duan, K., Parikh, D., Crandall, D., and Grauman, K. Dis-
covering localized attributes for ﬁne-grained recognition.
In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
3474–3481, 2012.
Fauw, J. D., Ledsam, J. R., Romera-Paredes, B., Nikolov,
S., Tomasev, N., Blackwell, S., Askham, H., Glorot, X.,
O’Donoghue, B., Visentin, D., et al. Clinically applicable
deep learning for diagnosis and referral in retinal disease.
Nature Medicine, 24(9):1342–1350, 2018.
Fong, R. C. and Vedaldi, A. Interpretable explanations of
black boxes by meaningful perturbation. In International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 3429–3437,
2017.
Ghorbani, A., Wexler, J., Zou, J. Y., and Kim, B. Towards
automatic concept-based explanations. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
9277–9286, 2019.
Goyal, Y., Shalit, U., and Kim, B.
Explaining classi-
ﬁers with causal concept effect (CaCE). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.07165, 2019.
Graziani, M., Andrearczyk, V., and M¨uller, H. Regres-
sion concept vectors for bidirectional explanations in
histopathology. In Understanding and Interpreting Ma-
chine Learning in Medical Image Computing Applica-
tions, pp. 124–132, 2018.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. In Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X.,
Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., and Lerchner, A. beta-
vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained
variational framework. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Huang, S., Xu, Z., Tao, D., and Zhang, Y. Part-stacked
CNN for ﬁne-grained visual categorization. In Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1173–1182,
2016.
Kellgren, J. and Lawrence, J. Radiological assessment of
osteo-arthrosis. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 16(4),
1957.
Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J.,
Viegas, F., et al. Interpretability beyond feature attribu-
tion: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors

===== PAGE 12 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
(tcav). In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 2668–2677, 2018.
Kumar, N., Berg, A. C., Belhumeur, P. N., and Nayar, S. K.
Attribute and simile classiﬁers for face veriﬁcation. In
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
365–372, 2009.
Lampert, C. H., Nickisch, H., and Harmeling, S. Learning
to detect unseen object classes by between-class attribute
transfer. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 951–958, 2009.
Lewis, D. D. Feature selection and feature extract ion for
text categorization. In Speech and Natural Language:
Proceedings of a Workshop Held at Harriman, New York,
February 23-26, 1992, 1992.
Losch, M., Fritz, M., and Schiele, B. Interpretability be-
yond classiﬁcation output: Semantic bottleneck networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10882, 2019.
Melis, D. A. and Jaakkola, T. Towards robust interpretability
with self-explaining neural networks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
7775–7784, 2018.
Murty, S., Koh, P. W., and Liang, P. ExpBERT: Representa-
tion engineering with natural language explanations. In
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Nevitt, M., Felson, D. T., and Lester, G. The Osteoarthritis
Initiative. Cohort study protocol, 2006.
Nixon, M. and Aguado, A. Feature extraction and image
processing for computer vision. Academic press, 2019.
O’Shaughnessy, M., Canal, G., Connor, M., Davenport, M.,
and Rozell, C. Generative causal explanations of black-
box classiﬁers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13913, 2020.
Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, vol-
ume 29. Springer, 2000.
Pierson, E., Cutler, D., Leskovec, J., Mullainathan, S., and
Obermeyer, Z. Using machine learning to understand
racial and socioeconomic differences in knee pain. NBER
Machine Learning and Healthcare Conference, 2019.
Sagawa, S., Koh, P. W., Hashimoto, T. B., and Liang, P.
Distributionally robust neural networks for group shifts:
On the importance of regularization for worst-case gen-
eralization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Sprague, C., Wendoloski, E. B., and Guch, I. Interpretable
AI for deep learning-based meteorological applications.
In 99th American Meteorological Society Annual Meet-
ing, 2019.
Sutton, C. and McCallum, A. Joint parsing and seman-
tic role labeling. In Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL), 2005.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wo-
jna, Z. Rethinking the Inception architecture for com-
puter vision. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
Tiulpin, A., Thevenot, J., Rahtu, E., Lehenkari, P., and
Saarakkala, S. Automatic knee osteoarthritis diagnosis
from plain radiographs: A deep learning-based approach.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 8(1):1–10, 2018.
Wah, C., Branson, S., Welinder, P., Perona, P., and Belongie,
S. The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 dataset. Technical
report, California Institute of Technology, 2011.
Yi, K., Wu, J., Gan, C., Torralba, A., Kohli, P., and Tenen-
baum, J. Neural-symbolic vqa: Disentangling reasoning
from vision and language understanding. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp.
1031–1042, 2018.
Zelenko, D., Aone, C., and Richardella, A. Kernel methods
for relation extraction. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3(0):1083–1106, 2003.
Zheng, A. and Casari, A. Feature engineering for machine
learning: principles and techniques for data scientists. ”
O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2018.
Zhou, B., Lapedriza, A., Khosla, A., Oliva, A., and Tor-
ralba, A. Places: A 10 million image database for scene
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 40(6):1452–1464, 2017.
Zhou, B., Sun, Y., Bau, D., and Torralba, A. Interpretable
basis decomposition for visual explanation. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 119–134,
2018.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
A. Datasets
A.1. Osteoarthritis Initiative (OAI)
Description and statistics. The source of the knee x-ray dataset is the Osteoarthritis Initiative7, which compiles radiological
and clinical data on patients who have or are at high risk of developing knee osteoarthritis. We follow the dataset processing
procedure used by Pierson et al. (2019) in their previous analysis. They analyzed data from the baseline visit and four
follow-up timepoints (12-, 24-, 36-, and 48-month follow-ups). Two types of data from this dataset were used in our analysis:
the knee x-rays, which served as the input to the neural network, and the clinical concepts associated with osteoarthritis,
which were annotated by radiologists for each knee x-ray.
After ﬁltering for observations which contain basic demographic and clinical data, the dataset contains 4,172 patients and
36,369 observations, where an observation is one knee for one patient at one timepoint. We randomly divided patients into
training, validation, and test sets, with no overlap in the patient groups. Speciﬁcally, we have 21,340 observations from
2,456 people in the training set; 3,709 observations from 421 people in the validation set; and 11,320 observations from
1,295 people in the test set.
Image processing. To process the knee x-rays, each x-ray was downsampled to 512 x 512 pixels and normalized by dividing
pixel values by the maximum pixel value (so all pixel values were in the range 0-1) and then z-scoring. Images were
removed if they did not pass OAI x-ray image metadata quality control ﬁlters.
Clinical concept assessment and KLG merging. The primary clinical image feature used in analysis is Kellgren-Lawrence
grade (KLG), a 5-level categorical variable (0 to 4) which is assessed by radiologists and used as a standard measure of
radiographic osteoarthritis severity, with higher scores denoting more severe disease. In addition to KLG, each knee image
is also assessed for 18 other clinical concepts (features) of osteoarthritis in various knee compartments, describing joint
space narrowing (JSN), osteophytes, chondrocalcinosis, subchondral sclerosis, cysts, and attrition.
The Osteoarthritis Initiative only assessed these additional 18 clinical concepts (besides joint space narrowing, which is
available for all participants) for participants with KLG ≥2 (a standard threshold for radiographic osteoarthritis) in at
least one knee at any time point. Therefore, in their analysis (and in this paper), Pierson et al. (2019) set these clinical
concepts to zero for other participants. This corresponds to assuming that that participants who were never assessed to have
osteoarthritis, and thus were not assessed for other clinical concepts, did not display those features. This procedure also
means it is impossible to use the clinical concepts to distinguish most x-rays with KLG = 0 from those with KLG = 1 in the
dataset. To evaluate concept bottleneck models on this dataset, we therefore merged the KLG = 0 and KLG = 1 classes into
a single level and translated the other KLG levels downwards by 1, leading to a 4-level categorical variable (0 to 3).
Concept processing. Some of the clinical concepts are very sparse, with almost all x-rays in the dataset showing an
absence of the associated radiographic feature. We found that there were insufﬁcient positive training examples to be able to
accurately predict these concepts; moreover, including these sparse concepts in the bottleneck models lowered the accuracy
of KLG prediction. We therefore ﬁltered out the clinical concepts for which the dominant class (corresponding to an absence
of the feature) represents ≥95% of the training data.
This procedure kept 10 clinical concepts: “osteophytes femur medial”, “sclerosis femur medial”, “joint space narrowing
medial”, “osteophytes tibia medial”, “sclerosis tibia medial”, “osteophytes femur lateral”, “sclerosis femur lateral”, “joint
space narrowing lateral”, “osteophytes tibia lateral”, and “sclerosis tibia lateral”. It ﬁltered 8 concepts: “cysts femur medial”,
“chondrocalcinosis medial”, “cysts tibia medial”, “attrition tibia medial”, “cysts femur lateral”, “chondrocalcinosis lateral”,
“cysts tibia lateral”, “attrition tibia lateral”.
After ﬁltering, we z-scored the remaining clinical concepts using the training set to bring them onto the same scale.
Some of the clinical concepts, such as joint space narrowing, are annotated with fractional grades (e.g., 1.2, 1.4, 1.6 etc.) in
the dataset. These partial grades represent temporal progression and cannot be deduced by looking at a single timepoint, and
they explicitly do not reﬂect fractional grades (e.g., 1.2 on one patient does not mean it is worse than 1.0 on another patient);
we therefore truncate these fractional grades.
Reader disagreements and adjudication procedures. KLG was read by two expert readers (i.e., radiologists) for each
x-ray. Discrepancies in these readings, if they met the adjudication criteria described below, were adjudicated by a third
reader: if the third reading agreed with either of the existing readings, then that reading was taken to be ﬁnal, and otherwise,
7https://nda.nih.gov/oai/

===== PAGE 14 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
the three readers attended an adjudication session to form a consensus reading. If discrepancies were not adjudicated, the
ﬁnal reading was taken to be the one from the more senior reader. KLG readings were adjudicated when they disagreed on
whether KLG was within 0-1 or 2-4, or when they there was a difference in the direction of change of KLG between time
points.
JSN was also read by two readers, with similar adjudication procedures. Discrepancies were adjudicated if the readers did
not agree on the direction of change between time points.
All other clinical concepts in our dataset were read by a single reader. For more information on the adjudication procedures,
please refer to the OAI documentation on Project 15.
A.2. Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB)
Description and statistics. The Caltech-UCSD Birds-200-2011 (CUB) dataset (Wah et al., 2011) comprises 11,788
photographs of birds from 200 species, with each image additionally annotated with 312 binary concepts (before processing)
corresponding to bird attributes like wing color, beak shape, etc. Visibility information on each concept is also provided for
each image (e.g., is the beak visible in this image?); we use this information to make our test-time intervention experiments
more realistic, but not at training time. Since the original dataset only has train and test sets, we randomly split 20% of the
data from the ofﬁcial train set to make a validation set.
Concept processing. The individual concept annotations are noisy: each annotation was provided by a single crowdworker
(not a birding expert), and the concepts can be quite similar to each other, e.g., some crowdworkers might indicate that birds
from some species have a red belly, while others might say that the belly is rufous (reddish-brown) instead.
To deal with this issue, we aggregate instance-level concept annotations into class-level concepts via majority voting:
e.g., if more than 50% of crows have black wings in the data, then we set all crows to have black wings. This makes the
approximation that all birds of the same species in the training data should share the same concept annotations. While this
approximation is mostly true for this dataset, there are some exceptions due to visual occlusion, as well as sexual and age
dimorphism.
After majority voting, we further ﬁlter out concepts that are too sparse, keeping only concepts (binary attributes) that are
present after majority voting in at least 10 classes. After this ﬁltering, we are left with 112 concepts.
B. Experimental details
B.1. OAI model architecture and training
The models we use to predict KLG from knee x-rays follow the hyperparameters and model setup used by Pierson et al.
(2019), except for the learning rate and learning rate schedule, which we tune separately. Our models use a ResNet-18 (He
et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet, with the last 12 convolutional layers ﬁne-tuned on the OAI dataset.
For the bottleneck models, the ResNet-18 network extracts high-level features from the image that is used to regress to the
concepts c with a single fully-connected layer. Subsequently, there is a 3-layer MLP, with a dimensionality of 50 for the
ﬁrst two layers, that is used to regress to the ﬁnal KLG y. The standard model is similar, except without any loss term that
encourages the bottleneck layer to align with the concepts.
For ﬁne-tuning, we use a batch size of 8, with random horizontal and vertical translations as data augmentation. Network
weights are optimized with Adam, with beta parameters of 0.9 and 0.999 and an initial learning rate determined by grid
search over [0.00005, 0.0005, 0.005], which decays by a factor of 2 every 10 epochs. The network is trained for 30 epochs
with early stopping; model weights are set at the conclusion of training to those after the epoch with lowest RMSE for KLG
on the validation set.
B.2. CUB model architecture and training
The main architecture for ﬁne-grained bird classiﬁcation is Inception V3, pretrained on ImageNet (except for the fully-
connected layers) and then ﬁnetuned end-to-end on the CUB dataset. We follow the preprocessing practices described in
Cui et al. (2018). Each image used for training is augmented with random color jittering, random horizontal ﬂip and random
cropping with a resolution of 299. During inference, the original image is center-cropped and resized to 299.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
For each model, we hyperparameter search on the validation set over a range of learning rates ([0.001, 0.01]), learning
rate schedules (keeping learning rate constant or reducing learning rate by 10 times after every [10, 15, 20] epochs until it
reaches 0.0001), and regularization strengths ([0.0004, 0.00004]), to ﬁnd a good hyperparameter conﬁguration. The best
model is decided based on task accuracy (or concept accuracy for the x →c part of sequential models) on the validation set.
Once we have found the best-performing hyperparameter conﬁguration, we then retrain the model on both the train and
validation sets until convergence, following Cui et al. (2018).
All training is done with a batch size of 64, and SGD with momentum of 0.9 as the optimizer. For bottleneck models, we
weight each concept’s contribution to the overall concept loss equally (which is in turn determined by λ for joint bottleneck
models). However, the binary cross-entropy loss used for each individual concept prediction task is weighted by the ratio of
class imbalance for that individual concept (which is about 1 : 9 on average) and normalized accordingly. This encourages
the model to learn to predict positive concept labels, which are more rare, instead of mostly predicting negative labels.
B.3. Test-time intervention
OAI. For OAI, we use the held-out validation set to determine an input-independent ordering for concept intervention.
Speciﬁcally, we use the concept labels in the validation set to intervene separately on each concept, replacing a single
value in our original concept predictions with that ground truth concept. We obtain the intervention ordering by sorting the
concepts in descending order of the improvement in KLG accuracy gained from intervening separately on each concept.
CUB. For CUB, the concept groups are determined by having a common preﬁx in the list of concept names. For example,
“has back pattern::solid”, “has back pattern::spotted”, “has back pattern::striped”, “has back pattern::multi-colored” all
describe the same group that concerns back-pattern. Since all models are retrained on both train and validation sets, as
described above, we do not follow the OAI procedure of determining a ﬁxed ordering. Instead, we randomly select concept
groups to intervene on at test time, using the class-level labels for all concepts within that group to replace the predicted
logits. To avoid intervening on concepts that are not even visible in the image, we use the concept visibility information that
comes with the ofﬁcial CUB dataset: for all concepts that are not visible in a given test image, their corrected values are set
to 0 regardless of what the corresponding class-level labels may be.
B.4. Data efﬁciency
For OAI, we subsampled the training and validation data uniformly at random. For CUB, to ensure that each of the 200
classes had similar numbers of examples, we subsampled the images from each class uniformly at random. To avoid the
computational load of hyperparameter searching for each model and degree of subsampling, we adopted the hyperparameters
chosen for the best-performing models on the full dataset but did early stopping on the subsampled validation datasets.
B.5. Linear probes
Standard (end-to-end) models. For OAI, we separately trained linear probes on the outputs after every ResNet block and
the fully-connected layers of the MLP of the standard model. The best-performing linear probe was the one trained on the
output of the ﬁnal ResNet block. For CUB, we ran a linear probe on the fully-connected layer of the standard model, since
the c →y part of the bottleneck models are linear.
SENN. To evaluate self-explaining neural networks (SENNs) (Melis & Jaakkola, 2018), we ﬁrst trained a SENN model
to predict KLG on the OAI dataset and then trained linear probes on the concept layer in the SENN model. We used the
open-source implementation from the authors of SENN,8 and therefore used a classiﬁcation objective for KLG prediction.
To match the expressiveness of our bottleneck models, we swapped the small CNNs of the SENN concept encoder and
relevance parameterizer with our ResNet-18 models. Similarly, for the decoder network in SENN, we used a more expressive
decoder comprising 2 fully-connected layers with batch normalization, followed by 5 transposed convolutional layers with
upsampling. The decoder was obtained by adapting a public auto-encoder implementation,9 changing the dimensionalities
of the fully-connected and transposed convolutional layers, and increasing upsampling layers to match our input image size.
We set the number of concepts for SENN to 10, corresponding to the number of clinical features in OAI. The learning rate
was set to 0.0005 and the batch size was set to 4, which was the maximum possible given the memory constraints. With the
above settings, the experiments were ran with two different seeds.
8https://github.com/dmelis/SENN
9https://github.com/arnaghosh/Auto-Encoder

===== PAGE 16 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
C. Excess errors of independent vs. standard models
We present an analysis of the independent bottleneck model, which uses concepts at training time, versus the standard
model, which does not. For simplicity, we consider a well-speciﬁed linear regression setting with normally-distributed
inputs X ∈Rd, concepts C ∈Rk, and target Y ∈R:
X ∼N(0, σ2
XId)
(1)
C = XB + ϵ1,
(2)
Y = Cb + ϵ2,
(3)
where ϵ1 ∼N(0, σ2
CIk) and ϵ2 ∼N(0, σ2
Y ). In contrast to the main text, we use capital letters for X, C, and Y here to
emphasize the fact that the input, concepts, and target are random variables. In words, the input X is a normally distributed
with dimension d; the concepts C of dimension k are a linear transformation of X with additive Gaussian noise; and the
output Y is a scalar-valued linear transformation with additive Gaussian noise. For analytical simplicity, we require ∥b∥2 = 1
and B⊤B = Ik.
Independent bottleneck model. In this setting, the independent bottleneck model comprises two linear regression models:
the ﬁrst estimates the matrix B that takes X →C, and the second estimates the vector b that takes C →Y . For ease of
analysis, we assume that the linear regression models are ﬁt using least squares on separate datasets: the ﬁrst dataset has
n1 training points in data matrices X ∈Rn1×d and C ∈Rn1×k, and the second dataset has n2 points in data matrices
C ∈Rn2×k and Y ∈Rn2. Concretely, we estimate
ˆB =

X⊤X
−1
X⊤C
(4)
ˆb =

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤Y
(5)
and then compose these estimators into the ﬁnal prediction ˆYIB = X ˆBˆb.
Standard model. In contrast, the standard model does not use concepts, and uses only one dataset with n points in
X ∈Rn×d and Y ∈Rn. Concretely, we can express Y directly in terms of X as Y = Xv + ϵ, where v = Bb and
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
C + σ2
Y ). This gives the least squares estimate
ˆv = (X⊤X)−1X⊤Y
(6)
and the resulting prediction ˆYSM = Xˆv.
Excess errors. We compare these two models using their asymptotic excess error as the number of training points
n1 = n2 = n goes to inﬁnity, where a model’s excess error is deﬁned as how much higher its mean-squared-error is
compared to the optimal estimator E[Y |X].
Proposition 1 (Relative excess error of independent bottleneck models vs. standard models in linear regression). Let
n1 = n2 = n tend to inﬁnity. Then the ratio of excess errors of the independent bottleneck model to the standard model in
the well-speciﬁed linear regression setting above is
lim
n→∞
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
≤
k
dσ2
Y + σ2
C
σ2
Y + σ2
C
.
Note that asymptotic relative excess error is small—i.e., the independent bottleneck has lower excess error than the standard
model—when k
d is small and σ2
Y ≫σ2
C. This corresponds to low dimensional concepts (relative to the input dimension)
and concepts with low noise (relative to the noise in the output).
To prove this proposition, we ﬁrst derive the expected errors of the independent bottleneck model and the standard model.
Lemma 1 (Risk of the independent bottleneck model).
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2] = σ2
C + σ2
Y + σ2
Y
σ2
X
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
n2 −k −1 + σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1 + σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
Proof. A direct calculation gives
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2] = E[((XBb + ϵ1b + ϵ2) −X ˆBˆb)2]
(7)
= E[(ϵ1b + ϵ2 + X(Bb −ˆBˆb))2]
(8)
= E[(ϵ1b + ϵ2)2] + E[X(Bb −ˆBˆb)(Bb −ˆBˆb)⊤X⊤]
(9)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y + tr

E[X⊤X]E[(Bb −ˆBˆb)(Bb −ˆBˆb)⊤]

(10)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y + σ2
Xtr

E[(Bb −ˆBˆb)(Bb −ˆBˆb)⊤]

,
(11)
where
( ˆBˆb −Bb) =

X⊤X
−1
X⊤(XB + ϵ1)

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤(Cb + ϵ2) −Bb
(12)
=

B +

X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1
 
b +

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2

−Bb
(13)
= B

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2 +

X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1b +

X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2.
(14)
We need to evaluate the expectation of this expression multiplied with itself, E[(Bb −ˆBˆb)(Bb −ˆBˆb)⊤]. Note that the cross
terms will cancel since ϵ1 and ϵ2 are independent of other random variables and have mean 0, E[ϵ1] = E[ϵ2] = 0. This
leaves three remaining direct (squared) terms, which we can evaluate separately since tr and E are linear operators.
The ﬁrst term is
tr

E

B

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2ϵ2
⊤C

C
⊤C
−1
B⊤

(15)
= tr

E

C
⊤
C
⊤C
−1
B⊤B

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤
E

ϵ2ϵ2
⊤
(16)
= tr

E

C
⊤
C
⊤C
−1
Ik

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤
σ2
Y In2

(17)
= σ2
Y tr

E

C
⊤C
−1
.
(18)
The expression within the above expectation is distributed as an inverse Wishart distribution, and therefore
σ2
Y tr

E

C
⊤C
−1
(19)
= σ2
Y tr
 
E

C⊤C
−1
n2 −k −1
!
(20)
= σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
n2 −k −1,
(21)
where the last equality comes from E[C⊤C] = σ2
XB⊤B + σ2
CIk = (σ2
X + σ2
C)Ik.
The second term follows a similar calculation:
tr

E

X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1bb⊤ϵ1
⊤X

X⊤X
−1
(22)
= tr

E

X⊤
X⊤X
−1 
X⊤X
−1
X⊤

E

ϵ1bb⊤ϵ1
⊤
(23)
= σ2
Ctr

E

X⊤X
−1
(24)
= σ2
C
1
σ2
X
d
n1 −d −1,
(25)

===== PAGE 18 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
where the second equality follows because ϵ1b is normally distributed with mean 0 and covariance σ2
CIn1.
The third term is
tr

E

X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2ϵ2
⊤C

C
⊤C
−1
ϵ1
⊤X

X⊤X
−1
(26)
= tr

E

C

C
⊤C
−1
ϵ1
⊤X

X⊤X
−1 
X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1

C
⊤C
−1
C
⊤ϵ2ϵ2
⊤

(27)
= σ2
Y tr

E

ϵ1
⊤X

X⊤X
−1 
X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1

C
⊤C
−1
(28)
= σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1tr

E

ϵ1
⊤X

X⊤X
−1 
X⊤X
−1
X⊤ϵ1

(29)
= σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
Ctr

E

X

X⊤X
−1 
X⊤X
−1
X⊤

(30)
= σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
C
1
σ2
X
d
n1 −d −1.
(31)
Putting the three terms together,
tr

E[( ˆBˆb −Bb)( ˆBˆb −Bb)⊤]

(32)
= σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
n2 −k −1 + σ2
C
1
σ2
X
d
n1 −d −1 + σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
C
1
σ2
X
d
n1 −d −1,
(33)
so the expected squared error is
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2]
(34)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y + σ2
Y
σ2
X
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
n2 −k −1 + σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1 + σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1.
(35)
Lemma 2 (Risk of the standard model).
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] = σ2
C + σ2
Y + d(σ2
C + σ2
Y )
n −d −1 .
Proof. A direct calculation gives
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] = E[((Xv + ϵ) −Xˆv)2]
(36)
= E[(ϵ + X(v −ˆv))2]
(37)
= E[ϵ2] + E[X(v −ˆv)(v −ˆv)⊤X⊤]
(38)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y + tr
 E[X⊤X]E[(v −ˆv)(v −ˆv)⊤]

(39)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y + σ2
Xtr
 E[(v −ˆv)(v −ˆv)⊤]

.
(40)
Since
ˆv −v = (X⊤X)−1X⊤(Xv + ϵ) −v
(41)
= (X⊤X)−1X⊤ϵ,
(42)

===== PAGE 19 =====
Concept Bottleneck Models
we have
tr
 E[(v −ˆv)(v −ˆv)⊤]

= tr

E[(X⊤X)−1X⊤ϵϵ⊤X(X⊤X)−1]

(43)
= tr

E[X(X⊤X)−1(X⊤X)−1X⊤]E[ϵϵ⊤]

(44)
= (σ2
C + σ2
Y )tr

E[(X⊤X)−1]

(45)
= (σ2
C + σ2
Y ) 1
σ2
X
d
n −d −1.
(46)
Plugging this back into the expression for E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] yields
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] = σ2
C + σ2
Y + d(σ2
C + σ2
Y )
n −d −1 .
(47)
Proof of Proposition 1. Note that the optimal estimator has risk
E[(Y −E[Y |X])2] = E[ϵ2]
(48)
= σ2
C + σ2
Y .
(49)
Thus, from Lemmas 1 and 2, the ratio of excess errors is
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
(50)
=
n −d −1
d(σ2
C + σ2
Y )

σ2
Y
σ2
X
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
n2 −k −1 + σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1 + σ2
Y
1
σ2
X + σ2
C
1
n2 −k −1σ2
C
d
n1 −d −1

.
(51)
Taking the limit as n goes to inﬁnity and letting n1 = n2 = n gives the desired result
lim
n→∞
E[(Y −ˆYIB)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
E[(Y −ˆYSM)2] −E[(Y −E[Y |X])2]
=
σ2
Y
σ2
C + σ2
Y
σ2
X
σ2
X + σ2
C
k
d +
σ2
C
σ2
C + σ2
Y
(52)
≤
k
dσ2
Y + σ2
C
σ2
Y + σ2
C
.
(53)
