
===== PAGE 1 =====
It’s Not a Modality Gap: Characterizing and
Addressing the Contrastive Gap
Abrar Fahim
University of Alberta
afahim2@ualberta.ca
Alex Murphy
University of Alberta
amurphy3@ualberta.ca
Alona Fyshe
University of Alberta
alona@ualberta.ca
Abstract
Multi-modal contrastive models such as CLIP (Radford et al. (2021)) achieve state-
of-the-art performance in zero-shot classification by embedding input images and
texts on a joint representational space. Recently, a modality gap has been reported
in two-encoder contrastive models like CLIP, meaning that the image and text
embeddings reside in disjoint areas of the latent space. Previous studies suggest
that this gap exists due to 1) the cone effect, 2) mismatched pairs in the dataset, and
3) insufficient training. We show that, even when accounting for all these factors,
and even when using the same modality, the contrastive loss actually creates a gap
during training. As a result, We propose that the modality gap is inherent to the two-
encoder contrastive loss and rename it the contrastive gap. We present evidence
that attributes this contrastive gap to low uniformity in CLIP space, resulting in
embeddings that occupy only a small portion of the latent space. To close the gap,
we adapt the uniformity and alignment properties of unimodal contrastive loss to
the multi-modal setting and show that simply adding these terms to the CLIP loss
distributes the embeddings more uniformly in the representational space, closing
the gap. In our experiments, we show that the modified representational space
achieves better performance than default CLIP loss in downstream tasks such as
zero-shot image classification and multi-modal arithmetic.
1
Introduction
Multi-modal models map inputs from different modalities into a unified representational space, such
that semantically similar inputs from different modalities map to nearby points in the representational
space. This can be practically useful because it allows transfer between modalities, but it is also more
consistent with the human sensory experience, which collects information across many modalities to
better understand the world. In the context of learning from paired images and text, CLIP (Contrastive
Language Image Pre-training) (Radford et al., 2021) establishes a strong proof-of-concept for this
reasoning. CLIP’s multi-modal contrastive loss allows the model to predict the text associated with an
image and vice versa. CLIP scales this approach to a very large dataset of 400M image-caption pairs,
learning embeddings that cover a wide variety of visual concepts applicable to many downstream
tasks.
But, while CLIP is powerful, it suffers from a modality gap (Liang et al., 2022), wherein image
embeddings reside in a space disjoint from that of the text embeddings. This phenomenon is also
seen in multi-modal contrastive models in other domains such as medical images (Zhang et al.,
2021), videos (Xu et al., 2021), amino acid sequencing (https://github.com/MicPie/clasp)
and brain decoding (Luo et al., 2023). Prior work has shown that performance on downstream tasks
improves when we minimize this gap, which can be achieved by simply shifting one modality’s
embeddings in CLIP space to change the size of the gap (Liang et al., 2022) through projection
(transforming the embeddings through some projection operation) (Zhou et al., 2023), or through
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2405.18570v3  [cs.CV]  6 Jun 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
fine-tuning (Oh et al., 2023). Recent work has additionally shown that learning latent spaces of visual
embeddings via alignment with human similarity judgments improves downstream task performance
(Muttenthaler et al., 2023). Similarly, work relating CLIP embeddings to human brain data found that
representations that had reduced the gap between modalities also led to improved downstream model
performance (Luo et al., 2023). Therefore, analyzing and closing this gap is a promising direction to
improve upon the strong representational capacity of CLIP and its variants.
In this paper, we conducted a comprehensive study of what causes the modality gap and simple ways
to close it. We make the following contributions:
• It’s not a modality gap. After summarizing the common purported causes of the modality
gap, we perform comprehensive experiments that show that accounting for these factors
does not close the gap, suggesting that the present understanding of modality gap may be
flawed.
• It’s a contrastive gap. We present experiments that demonstrate that the gap is a byproduct
of a high dimensional CLIP space, combined with contrastive loss that encourages CLIP
embeddings to occupy a lower dimensional manifold relative to the latent space.
• The contrastive gap can be closed. We show that simply fine-tuning CLIP by adding
a factor for uniformity and alignment can reduce the size of the gap by distributing the
embeddings more uniformly throughout CLIP’s latent space.
• Closing the contrastive gap improves downstream performance. Finally, we present
experiments to show that closing the contrastive gap, and thereby creating more aligned and
uniformly distributed representations, creates a representational space that is better for most
downstream tasks, including zero-shot image classification and multi-modal embedding
arithmetic.
2
Background
A multi-modal contrastive model learns a representational space in which semantically paired samples
from different modalities (positive pairs, e.g., an image and its associated caption) are closer together
in the latent space compared to other randomly chosen pairs (negative pairs, e.g., an image and
the caption associated with another randomly chosen image). Contrastive learning was originally
developed for the unimodal setting to learn self-supervised representations. One such popular model
is SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020), which uses the NT-Xent (Normalized Temperature-scaled Cross
entropy) loss to efficiently learn robust image representations. The NT-Xent loss is different from
previous contrastive learning methods as it does not need explicit negative samples. The NT-Xent
loss works by treating samples other than the positive pair in a training mini-batch as soft-negatives,
pushing them away from the positives. Unlike previous contrastive methods, the NT-Xent loss also
normalizes the embeddings to lie on a unit hypersphere in the representational space.
Wang and Isola (2020) introduced uniformity and alignment factors as desirable properties of the
representational space and showed that the NT-Xent loss optimizes the uniformity and alignment
properties in the limit of infinite negative samples, which is equivalent to infinite batch size for
NT-Xent loss.
Multiple models generalize the contrastive loss to the multi-modal setting (Zhang et al., 2021; Jia
et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021). Notably, Radford et al. (2021) scaled up vision-language contrastive
learning to larger datasets to achieve impressive zero-shot classification results.
Liang et al. (2022) observed that a modality gap appears in many models that use multi-modal
contrastive learning. There have since been several attempts to close the gap while monitoring
its effects on downstream task performance. Liang et al. (2022) show that altering the gap by
simply translating the embeddings of one modality onto the other can positively impact zero-shot
classification performance. Further, Oh et al. (2023) attribute the modality gap to the absence of
hard-negatives in a training mini-batch and synthetically generated hard-negative samples from
existing data points, showing that training with the hard-negatives improves representational quality.
In this work, we frame the gap between the multi-modal embeddings as a problem of low uniformity
and show that by simply optimizing for more alignment and uniformity (properties known to be
desirable in uni-modal contrastive learning), we can significantly reduce the size of the gap, while
increasing the quality of the representations learned.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1
Contrasting Images and Text using CLIP Loss
CLIP is an example of a contrastive model that learns image and text embeddings. CLIP loss (LCLIP
) is based on NT-Xent loss. While NT-Xent loss is designed to work on data points from a single
modality, LCLIP is adapted to work on two different modalities of data.
In our scenario, the multi-modal dataset contains N images and corresponding captions. We obtain
image embeddings EI
j ∈Rd by passing image Ij through the image encoder. Similarly, we produce
the text embedding ET
j ∈Rd by passing caption Tj through the text encoder. CLIP aims to bring
image embeddings and their corresponding caption embeddings closer together in the CLIP latent
space (CLIP space) by increasing the similarity (inner product ⟨., .⟩) between the corresponding
embeddings. The image and text embeddings are normalized to lie on a unit hypersphere in Rd.
The full CLIP loss is:
LCLIP = −1
2N
N
X
j=1
log
"
exp (⟨EI
j , ET
j ⟩/τ)
PN
k=1 exp (⟨EI
j , ET
k ⟩/τ)
#
−1
2N
N
X
k=1
log
"
exp (⟨EI
k, ET
k ⟩/τ)
PN
j=1 exp (⟨EI
j , ET
k ⟩/τ)
#
(1)
where the left term contrasts images with the texts (PN
k=1 in the denominator loops over text
embeddings as negatives for the jth image) and the right term contrasts texts to images (PN
j=1
in the denominator loops over image embeddings as negatives for the kth text). τ represents the
temperature parameter (τ = 0.01 at the end of CLIP pre-training)
3
The Gap in Multi-modal Contrastive Learning
Though CLIP effectively associates images with related texts, it also creates representational spaces
with a modality gap, a phenomenon that has generated some interest. Liang et al. (2022) attributes
this modality gap to two independent factors. First, they describe the cone effect of deep neural
networks, in which different random initializations cause the embeddings of two encoders occupy
two non-overlapping narrow cones in CLIP space. Second, they note the existence of mismatched
pairs in the dataset, where the pairing of images and captions is incorrect for some data points. Welle
(2023) studied the gap in three dimensions and attributed it to conflicting uniformity and alignment
terms in the contrastive loss, claiming that this leads to the existence of local minima that encourage
the gap. Further, (Oh et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2022) show that the modality gap persists even after
fine-tuning. In our first experiment in Section 3.2, we will show that these factors cannot fully account
for the modality gap by simulating an ideal scenario where all of the above factors are eliminated, but
the gap still exists at the end of training. The goal of this work is to suggest that the \emph{modality
gap} is not caused by trying to align different modalities in a unified representational space, but
instead arises as a consequence of the contrastive training that is used to align both modalities. We
therefore suggest that the term \emph{contrastive gap} better captures the underlying phenomenon.
3.1
Measuring the gap
To show that we have closed the gap between the embeddings of the two encoders, we must first find
a way to quantify the gap. We introduce the following two metrics to measure the size and severity of
the gap:
Distance between modality centroids (from Liang et al. (2022)) Given N images and N captions,
we denote the centroid of the image embeddings as CI = 1/N PN
j=1 EI
j , and similarly for the
centroid of the text embeddings. We compute the distance between centroids as ∥CI −CT ∥2, and
note that the centroid distance can vary from 0 to 2.
Linear Separability (from Welle (2023)) is the percentage of image and text embeddings that can
be distinguished by a linear classifier operating in CLIP space. We used 80% of the dataset to train
a linear model to classify CLIP embeddings as originating from either "image" or "text" input. We
then tested the performance of the classifier on the remaining 20% of the dataset and reported the
accuracy. If a set of embeddings are 100% linearly separable, this means that the space occupied by
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
At initialization
After 1200 epochs
Centroid distance
0.00
0.06
Linear separability acc.
0.50
1.00
Contrastive loss
4.83
0.00
Table 1: Modality gap persists even when all factors are accounted for: Modality gap metrics
and CLIP loss values before and after training CLIP from scratch in ideal dataset conditions. At
initialization: Distance between image and text centroids is zero and the embeddings are not linearly
separable, meaning that there is no modality gap. After training:
Centroid distance increases
slightly, but the text and image embeddings are perfectly linearly separable. Thus, the modality gap is
created by the contrastive loss.
each modality is completely disjoint. Conversely, 50% linear separability means that the image and
text embeddings are overlapping in CLIP space, meaning that they occupy the same region of the
latent space; i.e. there is no gap between the embeddings. To summarize, if we can effectively close
the gap we will find that the distance between centroids is small and linear separability is close to
50%.
3.2
The Modality Gap Persists Even When All Factors Are Accounted For
We now systematically remove the factors commonly known to contribute to the modality gap. We
started with the default CLIP architecture, and used the MSCOCO (Lin et al., 2014) dataset. We
created an idealized scenario where:
1. There is only one modality. We replaced the text encoder in CLIP with another copy of the
image encoder and trained the model on pairs of images instead of text-image pairs. Thus,
for this experiment the CLIP encoders are identical image encoders with different random
initializations.
2. Embeddings from the two image encoders occupy the same cone at initialization. In our
setup, after we initialize the two image encoders, we computed a fixed transformation matrix
that translates the embeddings of the second image encoder to overlap with those of the first
image encoder (following Liang et al. (2022)). Thus, the second encoder’s embeddings are
translated to occupy the same narrow cone as the first encoder’s embeddings at initialization.
This way, there is no modality gap at initialization.
3. There are no mismatched pairs. The positive pairs in our constructed dataset are actually
identical images. This eliminated the possibility that there would be mismatched pairs in the
dataset.
We ran this experiment with a dataset of 2048 randomly selected images from the MS COCO training
set. We used a batch size of 64, and the default CLIP dimensionality of 512D (i.e. Image embeddings,
EI ∈R512). Since the dataset is very small, we could run the model training to completion (train
loss = 0) fairly quickly (about 20k steps, or 1200 epochs).
We observe in Table 1 that even when the dataset is idealized and almost trivial to optimize on, and
the model is initialized without a gap, after training to zero loss, the CLIP embeddings are perfectly
linearly separable. Thus, there is a contrastive gap that is created as a byproduct of the contrastive
loss, even when the two encoders learn to align the same modality.
3.3
Visualizing the gap in 3D CLIP
We showed in the previous experiment that the gap was created during training when training on
512-dimensional CLIP. However, Welle (2023) shows that it is possible for CLIP loss to close the
gap between embeddings by optimizing synthetically generated 3-dimensional points in Euclidean
space without using a neural network.
We study the effects of CLIP loss on 3D data by optimizing a set of 1000 images and texts from
MS COCO train set data using CLIP loss and the default CLIP model. In Figure 1 we see that after
training for 275 epochs, CLIP loss is able to close the contrastive gap in 3D even on real-world data.
We report the Text-retrieval accuracies in Figure 1 as the accuracy with which we can retrieve an
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
(a) Epoch 0
I →T accuracy: 0.0
(b) Epoch 37
I →T accuracy: 0.0
(c) Epoch 150
I →T accuracy: 0.1
(d) Epoch 275
I →T accuracy: 0.87
Figure 1: Visualizing the training stages of 3D CLIP on 1000 image-text pairs from MS COCO. Red
points are image embeddings, and blue points are text embeddings. I →T accuracy represents the
text retrieval accuracies: Higher I →T accuracies mean that positive pairs are well contrasted in the
latent space relative to the negative pairs. The embeddings of each modality are initialized to reside
in separate cones due to the cone effect, before they form arcs and then eventually merge together as
rings. Finally, they spread out to fill the sphere.
input image’s caption given the input image’s embedding and the embeddings of all the captions in
the dataset.
We see that points on the 3D sphere are best aligned when they are evenly distributed on the sphere
(as evidenced by the very high text-retrieval accuracy when Figure 1d). Therefore, we speculate
that it is desirable close the contrastive gap and to distribute the embeddings more uniformly on
the unit sphere in Rd to improve the quality of representations. However, simply reducing CLIP
dimensionality to close the contrastive gap may not be desirable, as representations retain lesser
information in lower dimensions. Therefore, we propose explicitly optimizing for more uniformly
distributed embeddings in high-dimensional CLIP space. We will see that when the embeddings are
more uniform, the contrastive gap decreases, and in turn, the quality of the learned representations
increases.
4
Optimizing Alignment and Uniformity of CLIP Representations
We now introduce the concepts of uniformity and alignment in the representational space. Uniformity
refers to the property of the embeddings being uniformly distributed throughout the contrastive
latent space. Alignment refers to the positive pairs being close together (aligned) in the latent space.
Wang and Isola (2020) introduce uniformity and alignment as desirable properties in the unimodal
contrastive representational space. i.e., image models that had higher uniformity and alignment
values in their representational spaces learned better representations that led to consistent higher
downstream task performance. They also showed that the unimodal contrastive loss asymptotically
optimizes for uniformity and alignment with infinite negative examples. Finally, they empirically
showed that, with finite negative examples, explicitly optimizing for alignment and uniformity can
lead to better learned representations.
To study the effects of closing the contrastive gap, we adapt the uniformity and alignment properties
from Wang and Isola (2020) to the multi-modal contrastive space as follows:
Uniformity for Image space : LI
Uniform = log

1
N
N
X
j=1
N
X
k=1
exp (−2∥EI
j −EI
k∥2)


(2)
We define the uniformity for text space (LT
Uniform) similarly. Finally, the total LUniform term is:
LUniform = 1
2(LT
Uniform + LI
Uniform)
(3)
LI
Uniform and LT
Uniform each encourage the uniformity within the image and text embeddings respectively.
i.e., LUniform
only encourages in-modal uniformity. The original multi-modal contrastive loss
(Equation 1) does not have any such term that constrains embeddings within each modality to be far
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
apart. Instead, the denominators in Equation 1 only push negative text samples away from positive
image sample and vice versa .
To enforce a stronger constraint on the uniformity between negative image and text samples, we also
introduce a cross-modal uniformity term:
Cross-modal uniformity : LXUniform = log

1
N
N
X
j=1
N
X
k=1,k̸=j
exp (−2∥EI
j −ET
k ∥2)


(4)
Finally, to better align positive image-text pairs in CLIP space, we adapt the alignment term
from Wang and Isola (2020) to the multi-modal setting:
LAlign = 1
N
N
X
j=1
(∥EI
j −ET
j ∥2)
(5)
Uniformity and alignment properties have been shown to be desirable properties in the uni-modal
contrastive space. We validate the desirability of these two properties in the multi-modal setting.
In prior works evaluating the multi-modal contrastive representational space using alignment and
uniformity properties, Goel et al. (2022) and Oh et al. (2023) used cross-modality uniformity to
measure uniformity in the latent space. Meanwhile Al-Jaff (2023) explored explicitly training multi-
modal models using LUniform (i.e., only the in-modal uniformity term) and LAlign . In our work, we
combine both the in-modal and cross-modal uniformity terms to encourage more uniformity in the
latent space and reduce the size of the contrastive gap.
5
Experiments
We studied the effects of reducing the contrastive gap in CLIP space by optimizing for uniformity
and alignment of the latent space. We fine-tuned a pre-trained CLIP model by adding the LUniform
, LXUniform , and LAlign terms to the original CLIP loss (LCLIP , Equation 1). We demonstrate the
effects of fine-tuning pre-trained CLIP on the following losses
• LCLIP : The default CLIP loss
• LCLIP+Uniform+Align (LCUA ): LCLIP + LUniform + LAlign
• LCLIP+Uniform+Align+XUniform (LCUAXU ): LCLIP + LUniform + LAlign + LXUniform
Hyperparameters Overview
For our experiments, we fine-tuned the CLIP model made available
by Radford et al. (2021). We used the ViT-B/32 variant of the image encoder and a transformer (from
OpenAI’s official implementation1) as the text encoder. We studied the effects of fine-tuning over
various sizes of CLIP space (Rd, d ∈[32, 64, 128]). When fine-tuning, we reduced the dimensionality
of CLIP by randomly re-initializing the final linear projection layer of CLIP. For all our experiments,
we fixed the temperature (τ) parameter to 0.01, as τ converges to this value after CLIP pre-training.
We fine-tuned on the MS COCO (Lin et al., 2014) for 9 epochs. We list all hyperparameter settings
in the Appendix B.3
Experiments Structure
We first show the effects the new loss functions have on the representational
space by measuring the size of contrastive gap on the MS COCO validation dataset. Then, we analyze
the effects of reducing the gap by measuring image-text retreival accuracies on the MS COCO
validation dataset. We then experiment to see if the same results hold for off-distribution datasets by
evaluating zero-shot image classification performance on five standard datasets. Finally, we explore
finer differences in the representational spaces learned by the different loss functions by reporting
performance on multi-modal arithmetic.
5.1
Effects of Reducing the Contrastive Gap on MS COCO
First we explore the contrastive gap metrics on the MS COCO validation dataset (5k image-caption
pairs) for models with different losses. Though the MS COCO dataset has 5 captions per image, we
1https://github.com/openai/CLIP
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Linear Sep.
Centroid
Accuracy (↓)
Distance (↓)
LCLIP
1.00
0.66
LCUA
0.73
0.08
LCUAXU
0.83
0.14
Table 2: Gap metrics on MS COCO validation
dataset. Recall: the gap closes when linear sepa-
rability ∼0.5 and centroid distance is small. The
size of the gap is much smaller with uniformity
and alignment terms included.
LUniform
LXUniform
LAlign
LCLIP
-2.02
-2.79
0.82
LCUA
-3.64
-3.68
0.54
LCUAXU
-3.76
-3.81
0.69
Table 3: Final loss values for in-modality unifor-
mity, cross-modality uniformity, and alignment
on the MS COCO validation set.
Figure 2: Explained variances for all principle
components of the 128D latent space for several
losses.
Figure 3: Average zero-shot classification accu-
racies for fine-tuned CLIP on the different losses.
CLIP losses with uniformity and alignment terms
added consistently get better zero-shot accuracies
than default fine-tuned CLIP on the same dimen-
sionality.
used only the first caption. We show the results for d = 128, (other dimensionalities appear in the
Appendix A.1). The results in Table 2 show that all the new modified CLIP losses shrink the gap.
This supports our claim that increasing uniformity in CLIP space reduces the size of the contrastive
gap.
Next, we look at the distribution of the image and text embeddings in CLIP space using PCA and
explained variance ratios (Holland (2008)). PCA (Principle Component Analysis) is a technique used
to reduce the dimensionality of a feature space by summarizing the data in a smaller set of principle
components (PCs). The PCA explained variance is the amount of variance from the original data
captured or "explained" by each PC.
Figure 2 shows the cumulative explained variance of CLIP spaces learned using various losses.
Compared to LCLIP and LCLIP+Align+Uniform , LCLIP+Align+Uniform+XUniform has the the lowest cumulative
variance across all the principle components, indicating that cross-modal uniformity encourages the
embeddings to be distributed throughout the hypersphere more effectively. This is further shown in
Table 3, where we see that the LUniform , LXUniform , and LAlign terms are lower (i.e., embeddings are
more aligned/distributed) when we add alignment and uniformity terms to the CLIP loss.
Finally, we evaluated the quality of the representational space after reducing the contrastive gap. We
used the image-text retrieval task on the MS COCO validation dataset, a standard representative
task in the vision-language domain. We present the results in Table 4. For both the image-retrieval
(T →I) and the text-retrieval (I →T) tasks, we see that models fine-tuned with all the loss
functions perform comparably. These results suggest that it is possible to shrink the gap between the
embeddings, while maintaining similar image-text retrieval performance after fine-tuning.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
I →T(↑)
T →I(↑)
Top1
Top5
Top10
Top1
Top5
Top10
LCLIP
0.28
0.57
0.70
0.27
0.56
0.69
LCUA
0.26
0.54
0.68
0.25
0.54
0.66
LCUAXU
0.27
0.56
0.69
0.27
0.56
0.69
Table 4: Image to text (I →T) and text to image (T →I) retrieval accuracies for MS COCO.
Training with uniformity/alignment maintains image-text retrieval accuracies compared to default
CLIP. We report 1-standard error confidence intervals in Table 10 (Appendix A.2).
Centroid Dist.
LI
Uniform
LCLIP
0.71
-1.41
LCUA
0.532
-2.59
LCUAXU
0.59
-2.75
Table 5: Average contrastive gap size and image-uniformity values for 128D CLIP across all of the 5
datasets
5.2
Zero-Shot Transfer
Previously, we saw that optimizing for uniformity and alignment reduces the size of the contrastive
gap by encouraging the image and text embeddings to lie on higher dimensional manifolds in the unit
hypersphere in Rd. Now, we analyze the effects this has zero-shot image classification, a common
downstream task associated with assessing the quality of CLIP embeddings.
We evaluate our fine-tuned CLIP models on five standard image-classification datasets: ImageNet1k
(Russakovsky et al. (2015)), CIFAR 10, CIFAR 100 (Krizhevsky et al. (2009)), Caltech101 (Li et al.
(2022)), and Describable Textures Dataset (DTD) (Cimpoi et al. (2014)). We adopt the evaluation
strategy of Goel et al. (2022) and recommended by Radford et al. (2021): We generate prompts using
the class names to form sentences like "a photo of a class name", "A sketch of a "class name", etc.
We then pass these sentences through the text encoder to get prompt embeddings. We average all
prompt embeddings to a class embedding. We then pass the image through the image encoder and
classify the image by finding the closest class via cosine similarity between the embeddings.
Figure 3 shows the average zero-shot accuracies across the five datasets for each of the losses and
dimensionalities. CLIP losses with alignment/uniformity consistently outperform the default CLIP
loss, and XUniform adds additional benefit. In Table 5, we present centroid distances between class
and image embeddings, as well as uniformity loss values for image embeddings. We observe that
LCUA and LCUAXU are able to learn representations with higher uniformity and smaller contrastive
gap. LCUAXU performs the best on average across all the datasets and dimensionalities in the zero-
shot classification task, suggesting that lower LI
Uniform and lower values for centroid distance (lower
contrastive gap) may lead to better representations learned.
5.3
Multimodal Arithmetic
A high quality multi-modal representational space should have consistent structural representations
across the learned modalities. We used SIMAT (for Semantic IMage Transformation) (Couairon et al.,
2021) to evaluate such relationship consistencies between CLIP image and text ebeddings. SIMAT
computes a new image representation after transforming it with text delta vectors, and retrieves the
closest image to the transformed embedding. (i.e., EI
target = EI
input + λ˙(ET
target −ET
input), where λ is a
hyperparameter controlling the strength of the transformation).
Table 6 shows SIMAT scores across the different loss functions. Adding uniformity and loss terms to
the CLIP loss leads to increased SIMAT scores, indicating that the representational space learned
with uniform / alignment terms is more consistent with arithmetic operations between modalities.
This suggests that closing the contrastive gap by fine-tuning with added uniformity/alignment terms
could benefit applications that rely on the geometric structure and consistent arithmetic properties in
the latent space.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
SIMAT Score (↑)
LCLIP
36.02
LCLIP+Uniform+Align
42.18
LCLIP+Uniform+XUniform+Align
42.47
Table 6: SIMAT evaluation scores (λ = 1) for the different finetuning losses. Loss functions that
reduce the contrastive gap produce higher SIMAT scores (18% improvement over LCLIP ).
6
Conclusions
In this paper, we studied the representations learned by multi-modal contrastive learning algorithms
and analyzed the contrastive gap phenomenon. We showed that eliminating all reasons commonly
thought to cause the gap does not close it. Thus, this is not a modality gap. We instead propose the
term contrastive gap to describe this phenomenon. By studying the behaviour of the contrastive loss
in 3D, we deduced that the most important factor behind the gap is low uniformity of the embeddings
in the unit hypersphere. We additionally demonstrated that the contrastive gap is symptomatic of the
representations lying on a lower dimensional manifold in the latent space.
Motivated by the fact that the gap stems from low uniformity, we suggest adding explicit uniformity
and alignment terms to the CLIP loss. We show that directly optimizing for uniformity and alignment
in the latent space significantly reduces the gap, while forcing the image and text embeddings to lie on
higher dimensional manifold on the CLIP hypersphere. This supports our claim that low uniformity
in the representational space is the primary factor behind the contrastive gap.
We further show that closing the gap by simply fine-tuning CLIP with added uniformity and align-
ment terms improves zero-shot image classification and multi-modal arithmetic performance, while
maintaining or slightly improving image-text retrieval performance.
In this work we explored the contrastive gap in the context of limited data (fine-tuning CLIP on
MS COCO). In the future we would like to expand our scope and include larger datasets. Training
on larger datasets could lead to more insights into the extent to which the contrastive gap closes
by optimizing uniformity and alignment at scale. Finally, in our experiments, we saw that the
performance in the MS COCO image-retrieval task was similar for all the losses, while the uniformity
and alignment in the MS COCO space was better with the new loss factors. This suggests that there
may be other measures of quality in the embedding space besides uniformity and alignment more
indicative of representational quality for this task. Research into such metrics could help design more
efficient loss functions while enabling better understanding of the multi-modal contrastive latent
space.
7
Broader Impacts
The work we have presented here is quite theoretical so the broader impacts are less clear. However,
any model that learns from text and images has the ability to incorporate or enhance biases that exist
in the training data. For example, if some captions are harmful, creating a better model to represent
them may also be harmful. The images included in MS COCO also represent a biased sample of what
occurs in the real world. For example, scenes from certain countries are underrepresented. This will
impact any model trained on this data and could impact the utility of the model in certain deployment
scenarios.x
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
References
Mohammad Al-Jaff. 2023. Messing With The Gap: On The Modality Gap Phenomenon In Multimodal
Contrastive Representation Learning. Ph. D. Dissertation. Uppsala University.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2020. A Simple Framework
for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709
arXiv:2002.05709 [cs, stat].
M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, , and A. Vedaldi. 2014. Describing Textures in the
Wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Guillaume Couairon, Matthieu Cord, Matthijs Douze, and Holger Schwenk. 2021. Embedding
Arithmetic for text-driven Image Transformation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03162 (2021).
Shashank Goel, Hritik Bansal, Sumit Bhatia, Ryan A. Rossi, Vishwa Vinay, and Aditya Grover.
2022. CyCLIP: Cyclic Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining.
http://arxiv.org/abs/
2205.14459 arXiv:2205.14459 [cs].
Steven M Holland. 2008. Principal components analysis (PCA). Department of Geology, University
of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 (2008), 2501.
Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc V. Le, Yunhsuan
Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. 2021. Scaling Up Visual and Vision-Language Representation
Learning With Noisy Text Supervision. arXiv:2102.05918 [cs.CV]
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
(2009).
Fei-Fei Li, Marco Andreeto, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Pietro Perona. 2022. Caltech 101. https:
//doi.org/10.22002/D1.20086
Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Zou. 2022. Mind the
Gap: Understanding the Modality Gap in Multi-modal Contrastive Representation Learning.
http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02053 arXiv:2203.02053 [cs].
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. In
Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, David Fleet, Tomas Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 740–755.
Andrew F. Luo, Margaret M. Henderson, Michael J. Tarr, and Leila Wehbe. 2023. BrainSCUBA:
Fine-Grained Natural Language Captions of Visual Cortex Selectivity. CoRR abs/2310.04420
(2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2310.04420 arXiv:2310.04420
Lukas Muttenthaler, Lorenz Linhardt, Jonas Dippel, Robert A. Vandermeulen, Katherine L. Hermann,
Andrew K. Lampinen, and Simon Kornblith. 2023. Improving neural network representations
using human similarity judgments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans,
LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko,
Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine (Eds.).
http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2023/hash/9febda1c8344cc5f2d51713964864e93-Abstract-Conference.html
Changdae Oh, Junhyuk So, Hoyoon Byun, YongTaek Lim, Minchul Shin, Jong-June Jeon, and
Kyungwoo Song. 2023. Geodesic Multi-Modal Mixup for Robust Fine-Tuning. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=iAAXq60Bw1
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
2021. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. (2021).
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. 2015. Imagenet large scale visual
recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision 115 (2015), 211–252.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. 2020. Understanding Contrastive Representation Learning through
Alignment and Uniformity on the Hypersphere. (2020).
Michael Welle. 2023. UNDERSTANDING THE MODALITY GAP IN CLIP. (2023).
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger,
Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020. HuggingFace’s Transformers:
State-of-the-art Natural Language Processing. arXiv:1910.03771 [cs.CL]
Hu Xu, Gargi Ghosh, Po-Yao Huang, Dmytro Okhonko, Armen Aghajanyan, Florian Metze, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. 2021. VideoCLIP: Contrastive Pre-training for Zero-
shot Video-Text Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and
Scott Wen-tau Yih (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic, 6787–6800. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.544
Yuhao Zhang, Hang Jiang, Yasuhide Miura, Christopher D Manning, and Curtis Langlotz. 2021.
Contrastive Learning of Medical Visual Representations from Paired Images and Text. https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=T4gXBOXoIUr
Chenliang Zhou, Fangcheng Zhong, and Cengiz Oztireli. 2023. CLIP-PAE: Projection-Augmentation
Embedding to Extract Relevant Features for a Disentangled, Interpretable, and Controllable Text-
Guided Face Manipulation. arXiv:2210.03919 [cs.CV]
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
A
Additional Results
A.1
Gap Metrics on MS COCO after fine-tuning
We present the sizes of the contrastive gap as measured by centroid distance and linear separability
accuracy on the validation dataset of MS COCO (5k image-text pairs) for each of the loss variants.
Table 2 shows the size of the gap for 128-dimensional CLIP (i.e., CLIP latent space in Rd, d = 128).
Here, we extend those results to include gap sizes for d ∈[32, 64, 128]. We use a fixed batch size
of 64 for fine-tuning CLIP in all cases. We report 1-standard error sized confidence intervals for all
values, averaged over 3 different seeds.
Linear Separability Acc.
Centroid Distance
LCLIP
0.78 ± 0.05
0.10 ± 0.01
LCUA
0.59 ± 0.02
0.07 ± 0.01
LCUAXU
0.68 ± 0.05
0.12 ± 0.03
Table 7: Gap metrics on MS COCO validation dataset for CLIP in R32.
Linear Separability Acc.
Centroid Distance
LCLIP
1.00 ± 0.00
0.31 ± 0.03
LCUA
0.65 ± 0.01
0.07 ± 0.01
LCUAXU
0.78 ± 0.00
0.14 ± 0.00
Table 8: Gap metrics on MS COCO validation dataset for CLIP in R64.
Linear Separability Acc.
Centroid Distance
LCLIP
1.00 ± 0.00
0.66 ± 0.03
LCUA
0.73 ± 0.01
0.08 ± 0.02
LCUAXU
0.83 ± 0.02
0.13 ± 0.01
Table 9: Gap metrics on MS COCO validation dataset for CLIP in R128.
Tables 7, 8, and 9 all show that the LCUA has the least gap between the embeddings (least centroid
distances, and lower linear separability accuracies) across all the CLIP dimensionalities tested. The
results show that increased uniformity and alignment in the representational space can reduce the
size of the contrastive gap across a range of CLIP dimensionalities. Further, as the dimensionalities
increase, the size of the gap also increases. For example, linear separability accuracies increase for
LCUA after 9 epochs of fine-tuning as dimensionality increases from 32D to 128D.
Next, we look at the distribution of image and text embeddings in CLIP space using PCA and
explained variance ratios. Figure 2 in the main text shows cumulative explained variance of CLIP
spaces ( in R128) learned using the various losses. Here, we extend that figure to present the explained
variance ratios for CLIP spaces in Rd, d ∈[32, 64, 128]. We show the results in Figure 4.
From the figure, we see that LCUAXU has the lowest cumulative variance across all the principle
components for all the three dimensionalities of CLIP space tested. This indicates that the the
uniformity terms help to distribute the embeddings along more dimensions in the contrastive latent
space in Rd, across a wide range of d’s
A.2
Image-text retrieval for MS COCO
Here, we present the results for the image-text retrieval task on MS COCO validation dataset for
CLIP space in R128. We see that the image-text retrieval performance is very similar for all the three
losses (within one standard error). This implies that the increased uniformity and alignment (and
decreased size of contrastive gap) in the MS COCO validation space does not correlate to better
image-text retrieval performance.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
(a) 32D CLIP
(b) 64D CLIP
(c) 128D CLIP
Figure 4: PCA explained variances for each CLIP dimensionality after fine-tuning
I →T(↑)
T →I(↑)
Top1
Top5
Top10
Top1
Top5
Top10
LCLIP
0.28 ± 0.00
0.57 ± 0.00
0.70 ± 0.00
0.27 ± 0.00
0.56 ± 0.00
0.69 ± 0.00
LCUA
0.26 ± 0.00
0.54 ± 0.00
0.68 ± 0.00
0.25 ± 0.00
0.54 ± 0.00
0.66 ± 0.00
LCUAXU
0.27 ± 0.00
0.56 ± 0.01
0.69 ± 0.00
0.27 ± 0.00
0.56 ± 0.00
0.69 ± 0.00
Table 10: Image to text (I →T) and text to image (T →I) retrieval accuracies for MS COCO
for CLIP spaces in R128. Fine-tuning with added uniformity and alignment terms on MS COCO
maintains similar levels of image-text retrieval accuracies (all values within 1 standard error of each
other).
A.3
Zero-shot transfer
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
ImageNet
DTD
Caltech101
LCLIP
0.76 ± 0.02
0.32 ± 0.01
0.13 ± 0.00
0.10 ± 0.01
0.42 ± 0.01
LCUA
0.78 ± 0.01
0.33 ± 0.00
0.14 ± 0.00
0.10 ± 0.01
0.48 ± 0.00
LCUAXU
0.77 ± 0.02
0.35 ± 0.01
0.15 ± 0.00
0.09 ± 0.01
0.49 ± 0.01
Table 11: Zero shot classification accuracies for CLIP in R128. Error bars represent one standard
error.
For measuring off-distribution performance after fine-tuning on MS COCO dataset with the different
CLIP loss variants, we measure the zero-shot image-classification performance on five standard
image-classification datasets. We present the statistics for the validation splits of each of the datasets
below (we use only the validation set for measuring zero-shot accuracies):
We extend the results in Figure 3 by including individual zero-shot accuracy numbers for each of the
five datasets in Table 11.
B
Experimental Setup
B.1
Dataset
We fine-tune on the MS COCO dataset downloaded from (Lin et al., 2014) 2. We use the 2017 split,
with 118k training images, and 5k validation images. Each image has 5 human-generated captions
associated with it. In our experiments, we only take the first caption for each image.
2https://cocodataset.org
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Dataset
Test samples
Number of Classes
CIFAR-10
10000
10
CIFAR-100
10000
100
ImageNet1k
50000
1000
DTD
1880
47
Caltech101
6084
102
Table 12: Number of test samples, and number of classes for each of the five datasets used to measure
zero-shot accuracies.
Hyperparameter
Value
Image encoder
ViT/B-32
Text Encoder
Transformer (same as in 3)
Embedding dimensions
[32, 64 ,128]
Temperature
0.01
Epochs
9
Batch size
64
Learning rate
1e-6
Adam beta1
0.9
Adam beta2
0.99
Adam weight decay
0.1
Scheduler
None
Table 13: Hyperparameters used for fine-tuning the CLIP models
B.2
Computational Resources Used
training runs, we use NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs, and Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210 CPUs @
2.20GHz. One run for fine-tuning CLIP from pre-trained weights on MS COCO for 9 epochs needed
about 7GB GPU memory, and needed about 3.5 hours to complete (on a single GPU).
B.3
Model Architecture and Hyperparameters
We fine-tune the pre-trained CLIP model made available by OpenAI from Huggingface (Wolf et al.,
2020)3. We list the model hyperparameters that we use below:
C
Limitations
In this work, we explore the properties of uniformity and alignment in the multi-modal setting,
showing that added uniformity and alignment terms help to reduce the contrastive gap. One limitation
of our work is that we show this at a relatively small scale by fine-tuning CLIP on the MS COCO
dataset. Training CLIP from scratch on a significantly larger dataset might help gain more insights
into how the contrastive loss emerges during training at a larger scale, which is important as the
success of CLIP was dependent on pre-training it on a massive dataset. Another limitation is that even
after optimizing for uniformity and alignment in the MS COCO space, we see that the image-text
retrieval accuracies do not change significantly from that of default CLIP fine-tuning. While we argue
in this work that uniformity and alignment are desirable properties in the multi-modal representational
space (and directly optimize for them with our losses), the image-text retrieval accuracy numbers
in the MS COCO validation set indicate that there might be other properties of the latent space that
correlate to performance in this task.
3https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/model_doc/clip
14
