
===== PAGE 1 =====
A Theoretical Study of Inductive Biases in Contrastive
Learning
Jeff Z. HaoChen
Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
Department of Computer Science
{jhaochen, tengyuma}@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Understanding self-supervised learning is important but challenging. Previous theoretical works study
the role of pretraining losses, and view neural networks as general black boxes. However, the recent work of
Saunshi et al. (2022) argues that the model architecture — a component largely ignored by previous works —
also has signiﬁcant inﬂuences on the downstream performance of self-supervised learning. In this work, we
provide the ﬁrst theoretical analysis of self-supervised learning that incorporates the effect of inductive biases
originating from the model class. In particular, we focus on contrastive learning — a popular self-supervised
learning method that is widely used in the vision domain. We show that when the model has limited capacity,
contrastive representations would recover certain special clustering structures that are compatible with the
model architecture, but ignore many other clustering structures in the data distribution. As a result, our theory
can capture the more realistic setting where contrastive representations have much lower dimensionality
than the number of clusters in the data distribution. We instantiate our theory on several synthetic data
distributions, and provide empirical evidence to support the theory.
1
Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the effectiveness of pre-trained representations, which are learned
on unlabeled data with self-supervised losses and then adapted to a wide range of downstream
tasks (Brown et al., 2020, Caron et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020b,c, Chen and He, 2020, Chen et al.,
2020d, Gao et al., 2021, He et al., 2020, Radford et al., 2019, Su et al., 2021). However, understand-
ing the empirical success of this emergent pre-training paradigm is still challenging. It requires
novel mathematical frameworks and analyses beyond the classical statistical learning theory. The
prevalent use of deep neural networks in self-supervised learning also adds to the mystery.
Many theoretical works focus on isolating the roles of self-supervised losses, showing that they
encourage the representations to capture certain structures of the unlabeled data that are helpful
for downstream tasks (Arora et al., 2019, HaoChen et al., 2021, 2022, Saunshi et al., 2020, Wei et al.,
2021, Xie et al., 2021). However, these works oftentimes operate in the sufﬁcient pre-training data
(polynomial in the dimensionality) or even inﬁnite pre-training data regime, and view the neural
network as a black box. The only relevant property of neural networks in these works is that they
form a parameterized model class with ﬁnite complexity measure (e.g., Rademacher complexity).
Recently, Saunshi et al. (2022) argue that the pre-training loss is not the only contributor to
the performance of self-supervised learning, and that previous works which view neural networks
as a black box cannot tell apart the differences in downstream performance between architectures
(e.g., ResNet (He et al., 2015) vs vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020)). Furthermore, self-
supervised learning with an appropriate architecture can possibly work under more general condi-
1
arXiv:2211.14699v2  [cs.LG]  8 Apr 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
tions and/or with fewer pre-training data than predicted by these results on general architecture.
Therefore, a more comprehensive and realistic theory needs to take into consideration the inductive
biases of architecture.
This paper provides the ﬁrst theoretical analyses of the inductive biases of nonlinear architec-
tures in self-supervised learning. Our theory follows the setup of the recent work by HaoChen et al.
(2021) on contrastive learning and can be seen as a reﬁnement of their results by further character-
izing the model architecture’s impact on the learned representations.
We recall that HaoChen et al. (2021) show that contrastive learning, with sufﬁcient data and a
parameterized model class of ﬁnite complexity, is equivalent to spectral clustering on a so-called
population positive-pair graph, where nodes are augmented images and an edge between the nodes x
and x′ is weighted according to the probability of encountering (x, x′) as a positive pair. They essen-
tially assume that the positive-pair graph contains several major semantically-meaningful clusters,
and prove that contrastive representations exhibit a corresponding clustering structure in the Eu-
clidean space, that is, images with relatively small graph distance have nearby representations.
Their results highly rely on the clustering property of the graph—the representation dimen-
sionality and pre-training sample complexity both scale in the number of clusters. The important
recent work of Saunshi et al. (2022), however, demonstrates with a synthetic setting that contrastive
learning can provably work with linear model architectures even if the number of clusters is huge
(e.g., exponential in the dimensionality). Beyond the simple synthetic example discussed in their
paper, there has been no previous work that formally characterizes this effect in a general setting.
In this work, we develop a general theory that leverages the inductive bias to avoid the depen-
dency on the potentially huge number of clusters: although there exists a large number of clusters
in the positive-pair graph, the number of clusters implementable by the model (which we call mini-
mal implementable clusters) could be much smaller, even exponentially. Figure 1 shows an example
where a linear function can only implement one clustering structure but not the other, despite both
being valid clusters in the positive-pair graph. It’s possible that a minimal implementable cluster
consists of multiple well-separated sub-clusters but none of these sub-clusters can be implemented
by the model class.
We show that contrastive representations would only recover the clustering structures that
are compatible with the model class, hence low-dimensional contrastive learned representations
would work well on the downstream tasks. Concretely, suppose the number of minimal imple-
mentable clusters is r which can be much smaller than the number of natural clusters in the graph
r0. HaoChen et al. (2021) prove the efﬁcacy of contrastive learning assuming the representation
dimensionality (hence also sample complexity) is larger than r0. We develop a new theory (The-
orem 3.6) that makes the representation dimensionality only depend on r instead of r0. We also
extend this result to a more complex setting where we can deal with even more structured clusters,
e.g., when there are 2s clusters with certain geometric structures, but the representation dimension-
ality can scale with only s instead of 2s. See Theorem 4.5 and its instantiation on Example 5.1 for
this result.
We instantiate our theory on several synthetic data distributions and show that contrastive
learning with appropriate model architectures can reduce the representation dimensionality, al-
lowing better sample complexity. We consider a data distribution on a hypercube ﬁrst proposed
by Saunshi et al. (2022) which contains a small subspace of features that are invariant to data aug-
mentation and a large subspace of spurious features. When the function class is linear, we show
that the contrastive representations can solve downstream binary classiﬁcation tasks if the down-
stream label only depends on one dimension of invariant features (Theorem 5.3). When the function
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
0
0
00
0
0
0
00
0
1
1
11
1
1
1
11
1
0
0
00
0
1
1
11
1
invariant dimension
spurious 
dimension
0
0
00
0
invariant dimension
spurious 
dimension
1
1
11
1
1
1
11
1
0
0
00
0
0
0
00
0
not implementable
implementable
1
1
11
1
0.5
1
1
11
1
1
1
11
1
0
1
Figure 1:
A simple example where the linear function class learns the correct feature and ig-
nores the spurious feature. A simpliﬁed version of the synthetic example proposed in the work of
Saunshi et al. (2022). The orange points are the original data and blue points are augmented data
(obtained by adding noise in the spurious dimension). The dimension invariant to augmentation
is desired. Edges represent positive pairs that are constructed from augmentation. We say a real-
valued function implements a cluster if it outputs 1 on the cluster and outputs 0 on all other data.
We note that here implementing means matching the exact value, rather than simply matching the
label after applying some linear threshold. The ﬁgure above shows two possible ways to partition
the data into two clusters, but only the one on the left-hand side (which captures the invariant di-
mension) is implementable by a linear function. Here we use black numbers to indicate the target
output on the data, and green numbers to indicate the output of the implementing function which
extrapolates outside of the data support. Note that linear model is not composed with a threshold
function. The partition on the right hand side is not implementable because any linear model that
outputs constant 1 on the upper-left small cluster would also output 1 on the bottom-left small
cluster due to linear extrapolation. Here we use red numbers to indicate the output of the linear
function that contradicts with the target.
class is ReLU networks (hence more expressive), we show that the contrastive representations can
solve more diverse downstream classiﬁcation problems where the label can depend on all invari-
ant features (Theorem 5.6). We also provide examples for Lipschitz-continuous function classes
(Theorem 5.9) and convolutional neural networks (Theorem 5.12).
We provide experimental results to support our theory. We propose a method to test the num-
ber of implementable clusters of ResNet-18 on the CIFAR-10 dataset and show that there are indeed
only a small number of implementable clusters under the model architecture constraint (Section 6).
2
Related works
Contrastive learning learns representations from different views or augmentations of in-
puts (Bachman et al., 2019, Bardes et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020a, Chen and
He, 2021, Dubois et al., 2022, Gao et al., 2021, Henaff, 2020, Hjelm et al., 2018, Misra and Maaten,
2020, Oord et al., 2018, Robinson et al., 2021, Tian et al., 2019, 2020, Wu et al., 2018, Ye et al., 2019,
Zbontar et al., 2021). The learned representation can be used (either directly or after ﬁnetuning) to
solve a wide range of downstream tasks with high accuracy.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
The empirical success of contrastive learning has attracted a series of theoretical works that
study the contrastive loss (Arora et al., 2019, Ash et al., 2022, HaoChen et al., 2021, 2022, Lee et al.,
2020, Nozawa and Sato, 2021, Tian, 2022, Tosh et al., 2020, 2021, Wang et al., 2021), most of which
treat the model class as a black box except for the work of Lee et al. (2020) which studies the learned
representation with linear models, and the works of Tian (2022) and Wen and Li (2021) which
study the training dynamics of contrastive learning for linear and 2-layer ReLU networks. Most
related to our work is Saunshi et al. (2022) which theoretically shows (on a linear toy example)
that appropriate model classes help contrastive learning by reducing the sample complexity. We
generalize their results to broader settings.
Several theoretical works also study non-contrastive methods for self-supervised represen-
tation learning (Balestriero and LeCun, 2022, Garrido et al., 2022, Tian et al., 2021, Wen and Li,
2022). Garrido et al. (2022) establish the duality between contrastive and non-contrastive methods.
Balestriero and LeCun (2022) provide a uniﬁed framework for contrastive and non-contrastive
methods. There are also works theoretically studying self-supervised learning in other domains
such as language modeling (Saunshi et al., 2020, Wei et al., 2021, Xie et al., 2021).
3
From clusters to minimal implementable clusters
In this section, we introduce our main theoretical results regarding the role of inductive biases
of architectures in contrastive learning. Recall that contrastive learning encourages two different
views of the same input (also called a positive pair) to have similar representations, while two ran-
dom views of two different inputs (also called a negative pair) have representations that are far from
each other. Formally, we use pdata to denote the distribution of a random view of random input,
use ppos to denote the distribution of a random positive pair, and X to denote the support of pdata.
For instance, X is the set of all augmentations of all images for visual representation learning.
Following the setup of HaoChen et al. (2022), for a representation map f : X →Rk where
k is the representation dimensionality, we learn the contrastive representation by minimizing the
following generalized spectral contrastive loss:
Lλ(f) := E(x,x+)∼ppos[
f(x) −f(x+)
2
2] + λ · R(f),
(1)
where λ > 0 is a hyperparameter indicating the regularization strength, and the regularizer nor-
malizes the representation covariance towards the identity matrix:
R(f) :=
Ex∼pdata[f(x)f(x)⊤] −I

2
F .
(2)
This loss is very similar to the popular Barlow Twins loss (Zbontar et al., 2021) and has been shown
to empirically work well (HaoChen et al., 2021). Theoretically, the prior work proposes the notion
of positive-pair graph with X being the vertex set and an edge between the nodes x and x′ is weighted
according to the probability of encountering (x, x′) as a positive pair (i.e., ppos(x, x′)). This graph is
deﬁned on the population data, and intuitively captures the semantic relationship between differ-
ent data — when the positive pairs are formed by applying data augmentation to the same natural
data, it is expected that datapoints in the same cluster in the positive-pair graph would have similar
semantic meanings. Figure 2 gives a demonstration of the positive-pair graph.
Their analysis shows that learning contrastive representations with the above loss is equivalent
to spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2001, Shi and Malik, 2000) on this positive-pair graph, hence can
learn meaningful representations when the graph has clustering structures.
Different from the prior work, we study the representation map that minimizes the contrastive
loss within a certain function class F. Here we assume functions in F map data in X to representa-
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
…
…
A positive pair
Positive-pair graph
Figure 2:
A demonstration of the positive-pair graph. When the positive pairs are formed by
applying data augmentation (such as rotation) to the same natural image, data with the same se-
mantic meaning (e.g., the two butterﬂy images) tend to belong to the same cluster in the positive-
pair graph. Datapoints with different semantic meanings (e.g., a butterﬂy image and a clock image)
would not be connected in the positive-pair graph, hence belong to different clusters.
tions in Rk for some dimensionality k. The main contribution of our result is the improvement of
k due to the consideration of this speciﬁc function class: by studying the representation learned
within a constrained model class F, we will show that the necessary representation dimensionality
k is much smaller than that required in the prior work. As a result, the sample complexity for the
downstream labeled task would be improved compared to the prior work.
Let {S1, S2, · · · , Sm} be a m-way partition of X, i.e., they are disjoint non-empty subsets of X
such that X = ∪i∈[m]Si. For any x ∈X, let idx be the index such that x ∈Sidx. We consider a
partition of the graph such that there is not much connection between any two clusters, which is
formalized by the following assumption.
Assumption 3.1 (α-separability). The probability of a positive pair belonging to two different sets is less
than α:
Pr
(x,x+)∼ppos
(idx ̸= idx+) ≤α.
(3)
We consider downstream tasks that are r-way classiﬁcation problems with label function y(·) :
X →[r]. We assume that the downstream task aligns with the clusters:
Assumption 3.2. The downstream label y(x) is a constant on each Si.
Our key assumptions about the function class are that it can implement desirable clustering
structures (Assumption 3.4) but cannot break the positive-pair graph into too many clusters (As-
sumption 3.3).
Let S ⊂X be a subset of X, pS
data be the distribution pdata restricted to set S, and pS
pos be the
positive pair distribution ppos conditioned on both datapoints in the pair belonging to set S. For
any function g : S →R, we deﬁne the following expansion quantity:
QS(g) :=
E(x,x+)∼pS
pos[(g(x) −g(x+))2]
Ex∼pS
data,x′∼pS
data[(g(x) −g(x′))2].
(4)
We let QS(g) = ∞if the denominator is 0. Here the numerator represents the discrepancy between
a random positive pair, and the denominator represents the global variance of g. Intuitively, a
smaller value QS(g) means that function g does a better job at separating the set S into disjoint sub-
clusters, and hence implements an inner-cluster connection structure that is sparse. For instance,
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
if S contains two disjoint sub-clusters, and g has different constant values on each of them, then
QS(g) = 0. On the other hand, if S is densely connected, then QS(g) > 0 regardless of the choice
of g. We also note that QS(·) is also closely related to the sparsest cut formulation in spectral graph
theory. When g is restricted to output only values in {0, 1}, then the RHS of equation 4 is the
sparsest cut value of the subgraph supported on the vertices in S (cf. Deﬁnition 4 or equation 2.3
of Trevisan (2015)), and QS is also a typical way to relax the sparsest cut value (cf. Section 2.3
of Trevisan (2015)).
The ﬁrst assumption about the function class F assumes that no function in the class can break
one cluster into two well-separated sub-clusters:
Assumption 3.3 (F-implementable inner-cluster connection larger than β). For any function f ∈F
and any linear head w ∈Rk, let function g(x) = w⊤f(x). For any i ∈[m] we have that:
QSi(g) ≥β.
(5)
We note that when the function class F contains all the functions from X to Rk, Assumption 3.3
essentially says that each of {S1, S2, · · · , Sm} has large internal expansion, hence recovers Assump-
tion 3.5 in HaoChen et al. (2021). However, when F has limited capacity, each cluster Si can still
contain well-separated sub-clusters, but just those sub-clusters cannot be implemented by functions
in F.
Assumption 3.3 implies that the function class cannot be too expressive. However, in order for
the learned representation map to be useful for downstream tasks, it needs to be expressive enough
to represent the useful information. Thus, we introduce the following assumption on the function
class.
Assumption 3.4 (Implementability). Recall that idx is the index such that x ∈Sidx. There exists a
function f ∈F such that f(x) = eidx for all x ∈pdata where ei ∈Rm is the vector where the i-th dimension
is 1 and other dimensions are 0.
When both Assumption 3.3 and Assumption 3.4 hold, we say {S1, S2, · · · , Sm} are minimal
implementable clusters with respect to F.
We also introduce the following Assumption 3.5 which is true for any function class imple-
mented by a neural network where the last layer is linear. We note that this assumption is needed
only for the technical rigour of the proof, and is not essential to the conceptual message of our
theory.
Assumption 3.5 (Closure under scaling). For any function f ∈F and vector u ∈Rm, deﬁne function
f′(x) = u ⊙f(x) where ⊙means element-wise product. Then, we have f′ ∈F.
Let Pmin := mini∈[m] Prx∼pdata(x ∈Si) and Pmax := maxi∈[m] Prx∼pdata(x ∈Si) be the sizes of
the smallest and largest sets respectively. Under the above assumptions, we have the following
theorem that shows learning a representation map within F and representation dimensionality
k = m can solve the downstream task:
Theorem 3.6. Suppose {S1, S2, · · · , Sm} are minimal implementable clusters with respect to F (i.e., As-
sumptions 3.1 and 3.3 hold), and the function class F satisﬁes Assumptions 3.4 and 3.5. For λ > α/Pmin,
consider a learned representation map ˆf = arg minf∈F Lλ(f) that minimizes the contrastive loss. Then,
when k = m, for any downstream task that satisﬁes Assumption 3.2, there exists a linear head W ∈Rr×k
which achieves downstream error
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −ey(x)
2
2

≤α
β ·
Pmax
Pmin −α.
(6)
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
We note that Pmax ≈Pmin when the partitions are balanced. Thus, so long as α ≪Pmin (i.e.,
the probability of a positive pair crossing different clusters is smaller than the probability of it
containing data from the smallest cluster), the right-hand side is roughly α/β. Thus, when the
inter-cluster connection α is smaller than the inner-cluster connection that is implementable by the
function class β, the downstream accuracy would be high.
Comparison with HaoChen et al. (2021). We note that our result requires k = m, whereas HaoChen
et al. (2021) provide analysis in a more general setting for arbitrary k that is large enough. Thus,
when the function class F is the set of all functions, our theorem recovers a special case of HaoChen
et al. (2021). Our result requires a stricter choice of k mainly because when F has limited capac-
ity, a higher dimensional feature may contain a lot of “wrong features” while omitting the “right
features”, which we discuss in more details in the next section.
4
An eigenfunction viewpoint
In this section, we introduce an eigenfunction perspective that generalizes the theory in the
previous section to more general settings. We ﬁrst introduce the background on eigenfunctions
and discuss their relation with contrastive learning. Then we develop a theory that incorporates the
model architecture with assumptions stated using the language of eigenfunctions. The advantage
over the previous section is that we can further reduce the required representation dimensionality
when the minimal implementable clusters exhibit certain internal structures.
Here we note that we use the language of eigenfunctions because the positive-pair graph can
be inﬁnite. Casual readers can think of the graph as a very large but ﬁnite graph and treat all the
eigenfunctions as eigenvectors.
Our theory relies on the notion of Laplacian operator L of the positive-pair graph, which maps a
function g : X →R to another function L(g) : X →R deﬁned as follows.
L(g)(x) := g(x) −
Z ppos(x, x′)
pdata(x) g(x′)dx′.
(7)
We say a function g is an eigenfunction of L with eigenvalue ψ ∈R if for some scalar ψ,
Ex∼pdata

(ψ · g(x) −L(g)(x))2
= 0.
(8)
This essentially means that L(g) = ψ · g on the support of pdata.
Eigenfunctions with small eigenvalues achieve small loss on the positive-pairs. One impor-
tant property is that when g is an eigenfunction with small eigenvalue ψ, the quadratic form
E(x,x+)∼ppos[(g(x) −g(x+))2] is also small, that is, there is a good match between the positive-pairs.
In particular, when ψ = 0, we have that L(g)(x) = 0 on the support of pdata. Thus,
E(x,x+)∼ppos

(g(x) −g(x+))2
= 2Ex∼pdata

g(x)2
−2E(x,x+)∼ppos

g(x)g(x+)

(9)
= 2Ex∼pdata

g(x)2
−2Ex∼pdata

g(x)
Z ppos(x, x′)
pdata(x) g(x′)dx′

(10)
= 2Ex∼pdata

g(x)2
−2Ex∼pdata

g(x)2
= 0.
(11)
We can formalize this property of eigenfunctions with the following proposition.
Proposition 4.1. Any function g : X →R that satisﬁes E(x,x+)∼ppos

(g(x) −g(x+))2
= 0 is an eigen-
function of L with eigenvalue 0.
Clusters can be represented by small eigenfunctions. Intuitively, small eigenfunctions (i.e., eigen-
functions with small eigenvalues) correspond to disconnected clusters in the positive-pair graph.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
linear eigenfunction
1
1
0
0
nonlinear eigenfunction
1
0
0
0
Figure 3: Eigenfunctions capture the geometric relationship between clusters. Consider four dis-
connected clusters/nodes in the 2-dimensional Euclidean space. Since each cluster gives an eigen-
function, there is a subspace of 4 eigenfunctions that describes all the possible partitions. However,
two of them are special—the two eigenfunctions that group the four clusters into two groups of
two clusters along the axis—in the sense that they are linear. Therefore, the eigenfunction view-
point helps us distinguish these special groupings from the others: when constrained to be linear,
an eigenfunction can represent the clustering in the left ﬁgure but not that in the right ﬁgure. We
note that the cluster in the left ﬁgure is not a minimal implementable cluster under our current def-
inition in Section 3, since there exists a linear function within the function class that can separate it
into two halves with zero connection.
To see this, let S be a cluster that is disconnected from the rest of the positive-pair graph. Let g
implement the indicator function of S, i.e., g(x) = 1 if x ∈S, and g(x) = 0 if x /∈S. Since S is
disconnected from the rest of the graph, ppos(x, x′) is non-zero only if x and x′ both belong to S or
both are not in S. As a result, one can verify that L(g)(x) = 0 for all x, thus g is an eigenfunction
with eigenvalue 0. More generally, eigenfunctions with small but non-zero eigenvalues would cor-
respond to clusters that are almost disconnected from the rest of the graph. This correspondence is
well-known in the spectral graph theory literature (Trevisan, 2017).
Eigenfunctions can capture more information than clustering.
Although clusters correspond
to eigenfunctions with small eigenvalues, eigenfunctions could be more coarse-grained than
clusters—e.g., one eigenfunction could represent two clusters because the sum of indicator func-
tions of two disconnected clusters is also an eigenfunction. Therefore, when the clusters have some
geometric structures with each other, the eigenfunctions could help capture them. For instance,
consider the situation where there are 4 disconnected clusters centered at a 2 by 2 grid, e.g., {0, 1}2.
Since each cluster gives an eigenfunction, there is a subspace of 4 eigenfunctions. However, two of
them are special—the two eigenfunctions that group the four clusters into two groups of two clus-
ters along the axis—in the sense that they are linear, and therefore if the model family is restricted
to be linear models, the linear inductive bias will prefer these two eigenfunctions over others. Fig-
ure 3 gives a demonstration of this example. We note that the cluster in the left ﬁgure of Figure 3 is
not a minimal implementable cluster under our current deﬁnition in Section 3, since there exists a
linear function within the function class that can separate it into two halves with zero connection.
The eigenfunction viewpoint allows us to discuss this kind of structure.
In this section, we provide a generalized theory based on characterizing the implementability
of eigenfunctions. Intuitively, we will assume that there exist m (and only m) orthogonal eigenfunc-
tions in the function class with very small eigenvalue, and the downstream task can be solved by
these eigenfunctions. More precisely, let φ ≥0 be a very small real number (which can be thought
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
of as 0 for casual readers). We assume that there exist m approximate eigenfunctions with small
eigenvalues.
Assumption 4.2. Assume that there exist m “approximate eigenfunctions”, denoted by feigi : X →R, i ∈
[m], which belong to the function class F and satisfy the following conditions:
small quadratic form:
m
X
i=1
E(x,x+)∼ppos
feigi(x) −feigi(x+)
2
2

≤φ.
(12)
unit norm :
Ex∼pdata

feigi(x)2
= 1, ∀i ∈[m]
(13)
orthogonality :
Ex∼pdata
h
feigi(x)feigj(x)
i
= 0, ∀i ̸= j ∈[m]
(14)
Let feig(x) = [feig1(x), feig2(x), · · · , feigm(x)]⊤be the vector-output representation map that concatenates
the above m functions. We can summarize the above equations as for some real number φ ≥0, there exists
feig : X →Rm such that
E(x,x+)∼ppos
feig(x) −feig(x+)
2
2

≤φ
(15)
and
Ex∼pdata

feig(x)feig(x)⊤
= I.
(16)
Moreover, we can deﬁne φm be the minimal value of φ such that there exists feig that satisﬁes equation 15
and equation 16.
Assumption 4.2 can be viewed as a relaxation of Assumptions 3.1 and 3.4 in Section 3. Reit-
erating the intuition mentioned in the paragraph with the header “Clusters can be represented by
small eigenfunctions”, we can intuitively demonstrate the existence of approximate eigenfunctions
in some special cases. First, consider a graph with m disconnected clusters of equal size. Then, let-
ting feig(x) = √m·eix where ix denotes the index of the cluster that x belongs to, and eix ∈Rm is the
one-hot vector for index ix, we see that feig satisﬁes Assupmtion 4.2 with φ = 0. In other words, the
cluster identity function is a set of approximate eigenfunctions. Second, suppose the positive pair
graph contains m clusters with probability mass p1, p2, · · · , pm, then feig(x) = p−1/2
ix
·eix satisﬁes the
constraints with φ representing the total number of edges between clusters with some weighting
that depends on the cluster size.
Next, we state an assumption analogous to Assumption 3.3 in the previous section. Recall
that Assumption 3.3 intuitively says that even though a larger number of clusters exist in the
positive-pair graph, many of them are not implementable by the function class. From the eigen-
function viewpoint, Assumption 3.3 means that even though there could be many eigenfunctions
with small eigenvalues, only a small number of them are in the function class F. Concretely, we
make the following corresponding assumption which says that the vector-valued function feig that
was assumed to exist in Assumption 4.2 spans all the implementable eigenfunctions with small
eigenvalue.
Assumption 4.3. Let feig be the approximate eigenfunction in Assumption 4.2. Let g be a real-valued
function that is implementable by F (in the sense that g(x) = f(x)i for some f ∈F and i ∈[k]). We
assume that any such g which is an approximate eigenfunction with a small eigenvalue in the sense that
E(x,x+)∼ppos[(g(x) −g(x+))2] ≤˜φ · Ex∼pdata

g(x)2
,
(17)
must also be a linear combination of feig, that is, there exists ˜w ∈Rm such that
Ex∼pdata
h
( ˜w⊤feig(x) −g(x))2i
≤ϵ.
(18)
Here both ˜φ and ϵ are very small and can be thought of as 0.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
We consider downstream tasks that can be solved by feig. Let ⃗y(x) ∈Rr be a vector that rep-
resents the downstream label of data x (e.g., the one-hot embedding of the label when the down-
stream task is classiﬁcation). We have the following assumption on the downstream task, which is
analogous to Assumption 3.2 in Section 3:
Assumption 4.4. There exists a linear head W ∗∈Rr×m with norm ∥W ∗∥F ≤B such that
Ex∼pdata
W ∗feig(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

≤ζ.
(19)
Here ζ can be thought of as a very small number.
We have the following theorem using the above two assumptions:
Theorem 4.5. Under Assumption 4.2, 4.3, 4.4 (in which φ, ˜φ, ϵ, B, ζ are deﬁned), suppose ˜φ > φ or ˜φ =
φ = 0. Then, when k = m, for any λ > 0 such that φ ≤˜φ(1 −
p
φ/λ) and learned representation map
ˆf = arg minf∈F Lλ(f), there exists a linear head W ∈Rr×k such that
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

≲ζ + B2k
 ϵ + φ
λ

.
(20)
Since ζ, ϵ and φ are all very small values, the RHS of equation 20 is very small, hence the learned
representation achieves small downstream error. When these quantities are exactly 0, the proof is
simple (or arguably trivial), because the learned representation would exactly correspond to the
eigenfunctions in the function class with eigenvalue 0. In this case, the contribution of the theorem
is mainly the identiﬁcation of the proper mathematical assumptions that relate the existence of
approximate eigenfunctions with the performance of contrastive learning. In the more general
case where ζ, ϵ, and φ are small but not exactly 0, the main challenge of the proof comes from
establishing the required regularization strength λ, which depends on both φ (the quadratic form
of target approximate eigenfunctions) and ˜φ (the quadratic form of approximate eigenfunctions in
the function class that we want to cover), and deriving the error bound equation 20. The proof of
Theorem 4.5 can be found in Section C.
Relationship between Theorem 4.5 and Theorem 3.6. Theorem 4.5 is a strictly stronger version
of Theorem 3.6 in the previous section. In the setting of Theorem 3.6, the identity function of each
minimal implementable cluster would be an achievable eigenfunction. Theorem 4.5 considers a
more general situation than Theorem 3.6 where the minimal implementable clusters may not be
well-deﬁned, yet still we can show good results when the dimensionality k is equal to the number
of achievable eigenfunctions m. Indeed, as we will see in Example 5.1 in the next section, smaller
representation dimensionality is needed to satisfy the Assumption 4.2 of Theorem 4.5 than to sat-
isfy Assumption 3.4 of Theorem 3.6 (that is, the number of minimal implementable clusters in the
graph). We will mainly use Theorem 4.5 for the examples because it’s more general and easier to
be used, whereas we present Theorem 3.6 because it’s more intuitive to understand.
4.1
An end-to-end result
In this section, we also provide an end-to-end result where both the representation function
and the downstream linear head are learned from the empirical dataset, and the analysis requires
additional considering the complexity of the family class.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Given an empirical unlabeled pre-training dataset that contains npre
positive pairs
{(x1, x+
1 ), (x2, x+
2 ), · · · , (xnpre, x+
npre)}, we deﬁne the empirical contrastive loss:
bLλ(f) :=
1
npre
npre
X
i=1
f(xi) −f(x+
i )
2
2

+ λ ·

npre
X
i=1
[f(xi)f(xi)⊤] −I

2
F
.
(21)
We introduce the following notion of Rademacher complexity of the function class F.
Deﬁnition 4.6 (Rademacher complexity). We deﬁne the Rademacher complexity as
bRn(F) =
E
x1∼pdata,··· ,xn∼pdata
ϵ∼{−1,1}n

sup
f∈F
sup
i∈[k]
 1
n
n
X
j=1
ϵjf(xj)i


.
(22)
We have the following theorem which gives an error bound when both the contrastive repre-
sentation and the downstream linear head are learned from ﬁnite samples.
Theorem 4.7. Let Cf be the upper bound of the feature norm, i.e., ∥f(x)∥2 ≤Cf for all f ∈F and x ∈X.
Suppose function feig ∈F satisﬁes Assumptions 4.3 with (˜φ, ϵ) and Assumption 4.4 with (B, ζ). Suppose
˜φ > 2φ. Set k = m and λ ≥2˜φ + 1. Given a random sample of npre positive pairs from the pretraining
distribution, we learn a representation map ˆf = arg minf∈F bLλ(f). Then, given nds labeled data from the
downstream task {(x1, ⃗y(x1)), (x2, ⃗y(x2)), · · · , (xnds, ⃗y(xnds))}, we learn a linear head c
W ∈Rr×k such that
c
W :=
arg min
W s.t. ∥W∥F ≤4B
1
nds
nds
X
i=1
W ˆf(xi) −⃗y(xi)
2
2.
(23)
Then, with probability at least 1 −δ, we have
Ex∼pdata
c
W ˆf(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

≲ζ + B2k

ϵ + φ
λ

+
C4
fk2λ + B2k
˜φ −2φ
 
bRnpre(F) +
s
log(k2/δ)
npre
!
+ BCf
s
log(1/δ)
nds
. (24)
We note that the unsupervised sample complexity depends on the Rademacher complexity of
the function class, whereas the supervised sample complexity doesn’t. The term BCf intuitively
captures the complexity of the learned representation and usually increases as the feature dimen-
sionality increases. The fact that the downstream sample complexity scales with BCf demonstrates
the beneﬁt of learning a lower dimensional feature leveraging the inductive bias of the function
class. The proof of Theorem 4.7 is in Section C.1.
5
Instantiations on several synthetic data distributions
In this section, we instantiate our previous theory on several examples of data distributions
and show that when the model class has limited capacity, one can learn low-dimensional represen-
tations using contrastive learning and solve the downstream task with simple linear probing. In all
of these examples, if we use a much more expressive model class, the representation dimensionality
needs to be much higher, and hence more downstream samples are needed. These results demon-
strate the beneﬁt of leveraging inductive biases of the model architecture in contrastive learning.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
5.1
Linear functions
Our ﬁrst example is the hypercube example proposed in the work of Saunshi et al. (2022).
Example 5.1. The natural data ¯x ∼{−1, 1}d is the uniform distribution over the d-dimensional cube.
Given a natural data ¯x, an augmented data x ∼A(¯x) is sampled as follows: ﬁrst uniformly sample d −s
independent scalars τs+1 ∼[1
2, 1], · · · , τd ∼[1
2, 1], then scale the (s + 1)-th to d-th dimensions of ¯x with
τs+1, · · · , τd respectively, while keeping the ﬁrst s dimensions the same. Intuitively, the last d−s dimensions
correspond to spurious features that can be changed by data augmentation, and the ﬁrst s dimensions are
invariance features that contain information about the downstream task. The downstream task is a binary
classiﬁcation problem, where the label y(x) = sgn(xi) is the sign function of one of the ﬁrst s dimensions
i ∈[s].
We consider contrastive learning with the linear function class deﬁned below:
Deﬁnition 5.2 (Linear function class). Let U ∈Rk×d be a matrix and we use fU(x) = Ux to denote the
linear function with weight matrix U. We deﬁne the k-dimensional linear function class as Flinear = {fU :
U ∈Rk×d}.
Saunshi et al. (2022) directly compute the learned representations from contrastive learning.
We can instantiate Theorem 4.5 to this example and get the following guarantees:
Theorem 5.3. In Example 5.1, suppose we set the output dimensionality as k = s and learn a linear
representation map that minimizes the contrastive loss ˆf = arg minf∈Flinear Lλ(f) for any λ > 0. Then,
there exists a linear head w ∈Rk with zero downstream error, that is,
Ex∼pdata[(w⊤ˆf(x) −y(x))2] = 0.
(25)
In contrast, suppose the function class is the set of universal function approximators Funi. So long as the
output dimensionality is no more than 2d−1, there exists solution ˆf′ ∈arg minf∈Funi Lλ(f) such that any
linear head w ∈Rk has bad test error, that is
Ex∼pdata[(w⊤ˆf′(x) −y(x))2] ≥1.
(26)
The proof of Theorem 5.3 is in Section D.1.
We note that as an implication of the lower bound, previous works that analyze universal
function approximators (Arora et al., 2019, HaoChen et al., 2021, Tosh et al., 2021) wouldn’t be able
to show good downstream accuracy unless the representation dimensionality is larger than 2d−1.
In contrast, our theory that incorporates the inductive biases of the function class manages to show
that a much lower representation dimensionality k = s sufﬁces.
We also note that this example shows a situation where Theorem 4.5 works but Theorem 3.6
doesn’t, hence demonstrating how our theory derived from the eigenfunction viewpoint allows for
lower representation dimensionality. There are 2s model-restricted minimal clusters in the graph,
each encoded by one conﬁguration of the s feature dimensions. Thus, applying Theorem 3.6 gives
k = 2s (which is worse than k = s but better than k = 2d). However, all the functions in Flinear
that implement some clusters span a s-dimensional subspace, thus we can ﬁnd s eigenfunctions
that satisfy Assumption 4.3. As a result, learning s-dimensional representations already sufﬁces for
solving the downstream task.
5.2
ReLU networks
In the previous example, the downstream task is only binary classiﬁcation where the label is
deﬁned by one invariant feature dimension. Here we show that when we use a ReLU network
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
as the model architecture, the linear probing can solve more diverse downstream tasks where the
label can depend on the invariant feature dimensions arbitrarily.
Example 5.4. The natural data distribution and the data augmentation are deﬁned in the same way as
Example 5.1. The downstream task is a m-way classiﬁcation problem such that the label function y(·) : X →
[m] satisﬁes y(x) = y(x′) if x1:s = x′
1:s. In other words, the label only depends on the ﬁrst s dimensions of
the data.
Deﬁnition 5.5 (ReLU networks). Let U ∈Rk×d and b ∈Rk, we use fU,b = σ(Wx + b) to denote
the ReLU network with weight U and bias b, where σ is the element-wise ReLU activation. We deﬁne the
k-dimensional ReLU network function class as FReLU = {fU,b : U ∈Rk×d, b ∈Rk}.
We have the following theorem which shows the effectiveness of the ReLU network architec-
ture.
Theorem 5.6. In Example 5.4, suppose we set the output dimensionality k = 2s and learn a ReLU network
representation map ˆf = arg minf∈FReLU Lλ(f) for some λ > 0. Then, we can ﬁnd a linear head W ∈Rr×k
with zero downstream error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −ey(x)
2
2

= 0.
(27)
In contrast, suppose the function class is the set of universal function approximators Funi. So long as
the output dimensionality is no more than 2d−s, there exists solution ˆf′ ∈arg minf∈Funi Lλ(f) such that
any linear head W ∈Rm×k has bad test error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf′(x) −ey(x)
2
2

≥1
2.
(28)
When d ≫s, the above theorem shows that constraining the feature map to the ReLU networks
can achieve good downstream performance with much smaller feature dimensionality. The proof
of Theorem 5.6 is in Section D.2.
5.3
Lipschitz continuous functions
In many real-world settings where a neural network is trained with weight decay regulariza-
tion and stochastic gradient descent, the resulting model usually has a limited weight norm and
a relatively small Lipschitz constant (Jiang et al., 2019) partly because stochastic gradient descent
implicit prefers Lipschitz models, which tend to generalize better (Damian et al., 2021, Foret et al.,
2020, Li et al., 2021, Wei and Ma, 2019, 2020). Here we provide an example showing that restricting
the model class to Lipschitz continuous functions allows us to use lower dimensional represen-
tations. In particular, we consider the following example where a large number of clusters are
located close to each other despite being disconnected in the positive-pair graph. Our result shows
that contrastive learning with Lipschitz continuous functions would group those clusters together,
allowing for lower representation dimensionality.
Example 5.7. Let S1, S2, · · · , Sr ⊂Rd be r manifolds in Rd, each of which contains lots of disconnected
subsets. Suppose the diameter of every manifold is no larger than ρ, that is for any i ∈[r] and two data
x, x′ ∈Si, we have ∥x −x′∥2 ≤ρ. We also assume that different manifolds are separated by γ, that is for
any i, j ∈[r] such that i ̸= j, and x ∈Si, x′ ∈Sj, we have ∥x −x′∥2 ≥γ. The data distribution pdata is
supported on S1 ∪S2 ∪· · · ∪Sr and satisﬁes Prx∼pdata(x ∈Si) = 1/r for every i ∈[r]. A positive pair only
contains data from the same Si (but not all pairs of datapoints from the same set need to be positive pairs).
The downstream task is a m-way classiﬁcation problem such that the label function y(·) : X →[m] satisﬁes
y(x) = y(x′) if x and x′ belong to the same set Si.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
We introduce the following family of Lipschitz continuous functions with parameter κ:
Deﬁnition 5.8 (κ-Lipschitz continuous functions). A function f
: Rd
→Rk is κ-Lipschitz if
∥f(x) −f(x′)∥2 ≤κ ∥x −x′∥2 for all x, x′ ∈Rd. We deﬁne the κ-Lipschtiz function class FLip,κ as the set
of all κ-Lipschitz continuous functions in Rd →Rk.
We have the following theorem:
Theorem 5.9. In Example 5.7, suppose κ ≥
√
2r/γ. Let the output dimensionality k = r and learn a
κ-Lipschitz continuous function ˆf ∈arg minFLip,κ Lλ(f) for some λ > 0. Then, we can ﬁnd a linear head
W ∈Rm×k with small downstream error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −ey(x)
2
2

≤2rmκ2ρ2.
(29)
On the other hand, suppose the positive-pair graph contains r0 disconnected clusters, and the function class
is the set of universal function approximators Funi. So long as the output dimensionality k ≤1
2 · r0, there
exists solution ˆf′ ∈arg minf∈Funi Lλ(f) such that any linear head W ∈Rm×k has bad test error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf′(x) −ey(x)
2
2

≥1
2.
(30)
We note that a smaller κ (hence smoother function class) decreases the RHS of equation 29 and
leads to better downstream performance. When r0 is much bigger than r, the above theorem shows
that constraining the feature map to the Lipschitz continuous functions can allow for much smaller
feature dimensionality. The proof of Theorem 5.9 is in Section D.3.
5.4
Convolutional neural networks
Our last example shows that convolutional neural networks can learn contrastive representa-
tion more efﬁciently than fully connected networks when the downstream task has a certain trans-
lational invariance structure. We consider the following data generative model where the data
contains a patch that determines the downstream label.
Example 5.10. The natural data ¯x ∈Rd is deﬁned as follows: for some location t ∈[d] (which could depend
on ¯x) and consecutive s dimensions ¯xt:t+s−1 (the informative patch), we have ¯xt:t+s−1 ∈{−γ, γ}s where
γ > 1.1 The other d −s dimensions of ¯x (spurious dimensions) are all in {−1, 1}. Given a natural data
¯x, its augmentations are generated by the following procedure: for every spurious dimension i, ﬁrst sample
τi ∼Uni[0, 1], then multiply ¯xi by τi. The augmentation keeps the informative patch the same as original.
The downstream task is a m-way classiﬁcation problem such that the label function y(·) : X →[m] satisﬁes
y(x) = y(x′) if the informative patches for x and x′ are the same.
We consider the following convolutional neural network model with k channels.
Deﬁnition 5.11 (Convolutional neural networks). Let U = [u1, u2, · · · , uk]⊤∈Rk×s and b ∈
Rk.
We use f conv
U,b
: X →Rk to represent the following convolutional neural network: f conv
U,b (x)i =
Pd
t=1 σ(u⊤
i xt:t+s−1 + bi) where σ is ReLU activation function, and f conv
U,b (x) = [f conv
U,b (x)1, · · · , f conv
U,b (x)k]⊤.
We deﬁne the convolutional neural network class Fconv = {f conv
U,b : U ∈Rk×s, b ∈Rk}.
Ideally, we would like a learn a feature map where the ReLU function is only activated on
the informative patch. We have the following theorem which shows that contrastive learning with
convolutional neural networks can indeed learn such ideal feature maps, hence allowing lower
representation dimensionality than using fully-connected ReLU networks.
1Here we denote ¯xd+i = ¯xi.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Theorem 5.12. In Example 5.10, let output dimensionality k = 2s and learn a convolutional neural network
ˆf ∈arg minFconv Lλ(f) for some λ > 0. Then, we can ﬁnd a linear head W ∈Rm×k with zero downstream
error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −ey(x)
2
2

= 0.
(31)
On the other hand, suppose the function class is the set of ReLU networks FReLU, so long as the output
dimensionality is less than d × 2s−1, there exists a function ˆf′ ∈arg minf∈FReLU Lλ(f) such that any linear
head W ∈Rm×k has bad test error, that is,
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf′(x) −ey(x)
2
2

≥1
2.
(32)
When d ≫2, the above theorem shows that constraining the feature map to convolutional
networks can allow for much smaller feature dimensionality. The proof of Theorem 5.12 is in Sec-
tion D.4.
6
Simulations
In this section, we empirically validate the practical relevance of our key assumptions that the
model architecture (1) can implement clusters that align with downstream tasks, and (2) cannot
break the data into too many well-separated clusters.
Recall that we have two versions of the model-implementable clustering assumptions, As-
sumption 3.1 and Assumption 4.2, where the latter can be viewed as a soft-clustering relaxation
of the former as argued in Section 4. Since Assumption 4.2 is weaker and also easier to evaluate
empirically, we design algorithms to (heuristically) compute the following value φm deﬁned in the
last sentence of Assumption 4.2 (where feig is m-dimensional):
φm = E(x,x+)∼ppos
feig(x) −feig(x+)
2
2

s.t.
Ex∼pdata

feig(x)feig(x)⊤
= I.
(33)
Note that a small φm indicates that there exists m eigenfunctions within the function class F with
small eigenvalues, or intuitively m-way model-implementable partitions of the graph with small
inter-cluster connections. In other words, φm is a surrogate for how the architecture can partition
the graph into m clusters.
We propose a method that approximately computes the value of φm. We empirically compute
φm by ﬁrst minimizing the contrastive loss
Lλ(fθ) = E(x,x+)∼ppos[
f(x) −f(x+)
2
2] + λ ·
Ex∼pdata[f(x)f(x)⊤] −I

2
F
with representation dimension k
=
m and a heavily-tuned regularization strength λ
∈
{0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000}. Then, we whiten the obtained model fˆθ(x) to have exactly the
covariance I/r, that is, ¯f(x) = Ex∼pdata[fˆθ(x)fˆθ(x)⊤]−1
2 fˆθ(x)/√m which is a valid solution for equa-
tion 15 and equation 16. We compute E(x,x+)∼ppos[
 ¯f(x) −¯f(x+)
2
2] under various choices of λ and
pick the smallest result as the ﬁnal value of the estimated φm.
It’s more challenging to verify the conditions saying the clusters are not breakable into smaller
ones, such as Assumption 3.3 or Assumption 4.3. As a crude surrogate, here we evaluate φm for
larger m and show that φm will be larger when m becomes larger. For example, we will see that
φ10 for CIFAR-10 is relatively small for all architectures, indicating that the model architectures
can implement a 10-way partition with small inter-cluster connections. On the other hand, φ300
becomes signiﬁcantly larger which indicates that there are no ways for the model to implement a
good 300-way partition.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
We run experiments on CIFAR-10 and compute φm for m ∈{10, 30, 100, 300} for four models:
ResNet-18, ResNet-101, Wide ResNet (WRN) and vision transformer (ViT). We list the results in the
table below. Here all experiments are run for 200 epochs using SGD with a starting learning rate
0.01 and a cosine learning rate schedule. More details can be found in Section A.
m = 10
m = 30
m = 100
m = 300
ResNet-18
0.131
0.166
0.224
0.521
ResNet-101
0.053
0.090
0.163
0.459
WRN
0.080
0.093
0.138
0.340
ViT
0.072
0.108
0.168
0.389
Table 1: The empirical m-way separability φm on CIFAR-10 dataset.
We note that for any ﬁxed model, φm increases as m increases from 10 to 300, suggesting that
although the network can partition the data relatively well into 10 clusters, it cannot partition the
data into 100 well-separated clusters, which supports our theoretical assumptions. More concretely,
if one wants to ﬁnd 10 model-implementable clusters, then the cut value (the fraction of inter-cluster
edges) will be 0.053 for ResNet-101, whereas the best 300-way model-implementable clustering has
0.459 cut value. This suggests that there is not any good 300-way clustering that is implementable
by ResNet-101.
Moreover, we found that indeed ResNet-101, WideResNet, and ViT can implement more sepa-
rate clusters (clusters with smaller number of edges in between) than ResNet-18. This suggests that
our assumptions can distinguish different model architectures.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we provide a theoretical analysis of contrastive learning that incoporates the
inductive biases of the model class. We prove that contrastive learning with appropriate model ar-
chitectures allows for lower representation dimensionality (hence better sample complexity), and
instantiate this theory on several interesting examples. One open question is to allow for overpa-
rameterization, i.e., showing similar results when k > m. Under our current theoretical framework,
the optimal features are the top eigenfunctions of the graph Laplacian, and the learned representa-
tion may omit some top eigenfunctions when k > m and get suboptimal downstream performance.
To allow for a more ﬂexible choice of k, we believe that additional assumptions on the structure
of the function class need to be made. Another open question would be theoretically studying
the role of inductive biases under more common contrasive losses (e.g., the InfoNCE loss (Oord
et al., 2018)). Finally, we note that our work only concerns the inductive biases originating from
the model architecture, whereas in practice the learned representations may also depend on the
optimization method (Liu et al., 2022). Hence, one interesting future direction would be studying
how the implicit bias introduced by the optimizer inﬂuences contrastive learning.
Acknowledge
Toyota Research Institute provided funds to support this work.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
References
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dipendra Misra. Investigating the role of
negatives in contrastive representation learning. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Statistics, pages 7187–7209. PMLR, 2022.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximiz-
ing mutual information across views. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00910, 2019.
Randall Balestriero and Yann LeCun. Contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning
recover global and local spectral embedding methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11508, 2022.
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regulariza-
tion for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09882, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pages 1597–1607, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1597–1607. PMLR, PMLR, 13–18 Jul
2020b.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. Big self-
supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029, 2020c.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.10566, pages 15750–15758, June 2020.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 15750–15758, 2021.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020d.
Alex Damian, Tengyu Ma, and Jason Lee. Label noise sgd provably prefers ﬂat global minimizers,
2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An im-
age is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2020.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Yann Dubois, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Stefano Ermon, and Percy Liang. Improving self-supervised
learning by characterizing idealized representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06235, 2022.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimiza-
tion for efﬁciently improving generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01412, 2020.
Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence
embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821, 2021.
Quentin Garrido, Yubei Chen, Adrien Bardes, Laurent Najman, and Yann Lecun. On the duality be-
tween contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02574,
2022.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma.
Provable guarantees for self-
supervised deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34:5000–5011, 2021.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and Tengyu Ma. Beyond separability: Analyzing the
linear transferability of contrastive representations to related subpopulations. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition. In arXiv prepring arXiv:1506.01497, 2015.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for un-
supervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9729–9738, June 2020.
Olivier Henaff. Data-efﬁcient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4182–4192. PMLR, 2020.
R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
and maximization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantastic
generalization measures and where to ﬁnd them. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02178, 2019.
Michel Ledoux and Michel Talagrand. Probability in Banach Spaces: isoperimetry and processes, vol-
ume 23. Springer Science & Business Media, 1991.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
Provable self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01064, 2020.
Zhiyuan Li, Tianhao Wang, and Sanjeev Arora. What happens after sgd reaches zero loss?–a math-
ematical framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06914, 2021.
Hong Liu, Sang Michael Xie, Zhiyuan Li, and Tengyu Ma. Same pre-training loss, better down-
stream: Implicit bias matters for language models. 2022.
Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. Self-supervised learning of pretext-invariant representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6707–6717, 2020.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Andrew Ng, Michael Jordan, and Yair Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 14:849–856, 2001.
Kento Nozawa and Issei Sato. Understanding negative samples in instance discriminative self-
supervised representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:5784–
5797, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
tive coding. arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Joshua David Robinson, Ching-Yao Chuang, Suvrit Sra, and Stefanie Jegelka. Contrastive learning
with hard negative samples. In ICLR, 2021.
Nikunj Saunshi, Sadhika Malladi, and Sanjeev Arora. A mathematical exploration of why language
models help solve downstream tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03648, 2020.
Nikunj Saunshi, Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Dipendra Misra, Cyril Zhang, Sanjeev Arora, Sham
Kakade, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Understanding contrastive learning requires incorporat-
ing inductive biases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.14037, 2022.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.
Yixuan Su, Fangyu Liu, Zaiqiao Meng, Tian Lan, Lei Shu, Ehsan Shareghi, and Nigel Collier. Tacl:
Improving bert pre-training with token-aware contrastive learning, 2021.
Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05849, 2019.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
makes for good views for contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10243, 2020.
Yuandong Tian. Deep contrastive learning is provably (almost) principal component analysis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.12680, 2022.
Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learning dynam-
ics without contrastive pairs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10268–10278.
PMLR, 2021.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive estimation reveals topic
posterior information to linear models. arXiv:2003.02234, 2020.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive learning, multi-view re-
dundancy, and linear models. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 1179–1206. PMLR, 2021.
Luca Trevisan. Notes on expansion , sparsest cut , and spectral graph theory. 2015.
Luca Trevisan. Lecture notes on graph partitioning, expanders and spectral methods. University of
California, Berkeley, https://people. eecs. berkeley. edu/luca/books/expanders-2016. pdf, 2017.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Yifei Wang, Qi Zhang, Yisen Wang, Jiansheng Yang, and Zhouchen Lin.
Chaos is a ladder: A
new theoretical understanding of contrastive learning via augmentation overlap. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Colin Wei and Tengyu Ma. Data-dependent sample complexity of deep neural networks via lips-
chitz augmentation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 9722–9733, 2019.
Colin Wei and Tengyu Ma. Improved sample complexities for deep networks and robust classiﬁca-
tion via an all-layer margin. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Colin Wei, Sang Michael Xie, and Tengyu Ma. Why do pretrained language models help in down-
stream tasks? an analysis of head and prompt tuning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 34:16158–16170, 2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 11112–11122. PMLR,
2021.
Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. The mechanism of prediction head in non-contrastive self-supervised
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06226, 2022.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
parametric instance discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 3733–3742, 2018.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
learning as implicit bayesian inference.
In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2021.
Mang Ye, Xu Zhang, Pong C Yuen, and Shih-Fu Chang. Unsupervised embedding learning via
invariant and spreading instance feature. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6210–6219, 2019.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12310–
12320. PMLR, 2021.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
A
Addition experimental details
We train a ResNet-18/ResNet-101/Wide-ResNet/Vit model on CIFAR-10 and test the φm
on the test set.
We train with SGD using initial learning rate 0.01 and with a cosine decay-
ing schedule, and use a momentum 0.9, weight decay 0.0005 and a batch size of 128.
All ex-
periments are run for 200 epochs.
We test with m ∈{10, 30, 100, 300} and grid search using
λ ∈{0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000}, and for each m we report the minimal φm that is achieved
by any λ.
In our experiments, we always initialized the model with a pre-trained model. Our pre-trained
model is the result of running the spectral contrastive learning algorithm (HaoChen et al., 2021) for
800 epochs on CIFAR-10, following the same hyperparameter choice as in their paper.
B
Proofs for Section 3
Proof of Theorem 3.6. Let Pi := Prx∼pdata(x ∈Si) be the probability of Si. Let f∗be the function
f∗(x) =
1
√
Pidx eidx. From Assumption 3.4 and Assumption 3.5, we have f∗∈F.
We ﬁrst show that f∗achieve small contrastive loss. For the regularizer term, we have
Ex∼pdata
h
f∗(x)f∗(x)⊤i
=
X
i∈[m]
Pi · 1
Pi
· eidxe⊤
idx = I.
(34)
Thus, we have R(f∗) = 0. For the discrepancy term, let Pmin := mini∈[m] Pi be the probability mass
of the smallest set, we have
Ex,x+
hf∗(x) −f∗(x+)
2
2
i
≤
1
Pmin
·
Pr
(x,x+)∼ppos
(idx ̸= idx+) ≤
α
Pmin
.
(35)
Combining equation 34 and equation 35 we have
Lλ(f∗) = Ex,x+
hf∗(x) −f∗(x+)
2
2
i
+ λ · R(f) ≤
α
Pmin
.
(36)
Since ˆf = arg minf∈F Lλ(f) is the minimizer of contrastive loss within the function class, we
have
Lλ( ˆf) ≤Lλ(f∗) ≤
α
Pmin
.
(37)
Deﬁne matrix
M := Ex∼pdata
h
ˆf(x) ˆf(x)⊤i
.
(38)
We have
∥M −I∥2
F ≤Lλ( ˆf)
λ
≤
α
λPmin
.
(39)
Since λ >
α
Pmin , we know that M is a full rank matrix, thus we can deﬁne function
˜f(x) := M−1
2 ˆf(x).
(40)
Let
Q := Ex∼pdata
h
˜f(x)f∗(x)⊤i
,
(41)
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
and
πf(x) := ˜f(x) −Qf∗(x).
(42)
We know that
Ex∼pdata
h
πf(x)f∗(x)⊤i
= Ex∼pdata
h
˜f(x)f∗(x)⊤i
−QEx∼pdata
h
f∗(x)f∗(x)⊤i
= 0.
(43)
Using Assumption 3.3 we have:
E(x,x+)∼ppos
hπf(x) −πf(x+)
2
2
i
≥
X
i∈[m]
(Pi −α) · E(x,x+)∼pposi
hπf(x) −πf(x+)
2
2
i
≥β ·
X
i∈[m]
(Pi −α) · Ex∼pdatai,x′∼pdatai
hπf(x) −πf(x′)
2
2
i
=2β ·
X
i∈[m]
(Pi −α) · Ex∼pdatai
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
=2β · (1 −
α
Pmin
) · Ex∼pdata
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
.
(44)
On the other hand, we have
E(x,x+)∼ppos
hπf(x) −πf(x+)
2
2
i
≤E(x,x+)∼ppos
 ˜f(x) −˜f(x+)

2
2

≤
M−1
spec · E(x,x+)∼ppos
 ˆf(x) −ˆf(x+)

2
2

≤

1 +
r
α
λPmin

·
α
Pmin
.
(45)
Combining equation 44 and equation 45 we have
Ex∼pdata
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
≤

1 +
r
α
λPmin

·
α
2β(Pmin −α).
(46)
By Lemma B.1, we know that there exists a matrix U ∈Rm×m such that
Ex∼pdata
f∗(x) −UM−1/2 ˆf(x)

2
2

≤

1 +
r
α
λPmin

·
α
2β(Pmin −α)
(47)
≤
α
β(Pmin −α).
(48)
Thus, if we deﬁne matrix W = diag{√P1, √P2, · · · , √Pm}UM−1/2, then we have
Ex∼pdata
eidx −W ˆf(x)

2
2

≤PmaxEx∼pdata
f∗(x) −UM−1/2 ˆf(x)

2
2

(49)
≤Pmax
α
β(Pmin −α),
(50)
which ﬁnishes the proof.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Lemma B.1. Suppose f : X →Rm and g : X →Rm are two functions deﬁned on X such that
Ex∼pdata
h
f(x)f(x)⊤i
= Ex∼pdata
h
g(x)g(x)⊤i
= I.
(51)
Deﬁne the projection of f onto g’s orthogonal subspace as:
πf(x) = f(x) −Ex′∼pdata
h
f(x)g(x)⊤i
g(x).
(52)
Then, there exists matrix U ∈Rm×m such that
Ex∼pdata
h
∥g(x) −Uf(x)∥2
2
i
= Ex∼pdata
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
.
(53)
Proof of Lemma B.1. Let matrix
U = Ex′∼pdata
h
g(x)f(x)⊤i
.
(54)
We have
Ex∼pdata
h
∥g(x) −Uf(x)∥2
2
i
(55)
=Ex∼pdata
h
∥g(x)∥2
2
i
−2Ex∼pdata
h
g(x)⊤Uf(x)
i
+ Ex∼pdata
h
f(x)⊤U⊤Uf(x)
i
(56)
=m −2 ∥U∥2
F + ∥U∥2
F
(57)
=m −∥U∥2
F .
(58)
On the other hand, we have
Ex∼pdata
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
(59)
=Ex∼pdata
f(x) −U⊤g(x)

2
2

(60)
=Ex∼pdata
h
∥f(x)∥2
2
i
−2Ex∼pdata
h
f(x)⊤U⊤g(x)
i
+ Ex∼pdata
h
g(x)⊤UU⊤g(x)
i
(61)
=m −∥U∥2
F .
(62)
Thus, we have
Ex∼pdata
h
∥g(x) −Uf(x)∥2
2
i
= Ex∼pdata
h
∥πf(x)∥2
2
i
,
(63)
which ﬁnishes the proof.
C
Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Proposition 4.1. Deﬁne function
˜g(x) =
p
pdata(x)g(x).
(64)
Deﬁne the symmetric Laplacian operator
eL(˜g)(x) = ˜g(x) −
Z
ppos(x, x′)
p
pdata(x)
p
pdata(x′)
˜g(x′)dx′.
(65)
It can be veriﬁed that
Z
x
˜g(x)eL(˜g)(x) = 0.
(66)
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Notice that the operator eL is PSD, we have that
Z
x
(eL(˜g)(x))2 = 0,
(67)
which is equivalent to
Ex∼pdata

(L(˜g)(x))2
= 0,
(68)
hence ﬁnishes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 4.5. Notice that Lλ(feig) ≤φ, we know that Lλ( ˆf) ≤φ, so
Ex∼pdata
h
ˆf(x) ˆf(x)⊤i
−I

2
F ≤φ
λ,
(69)
and
E(x,x+)∼ppos
 ˆf(x) −ˆf(x+)

2
2

≤φ.
(70)
Therefore, for any i ∈[k], we have
Ex∼pdata
h
ˆf(x)2
i
i
≥1 −
r
φ
λ,
(71)
and
E(x,x+)∼ppos

ˆf(x)i −ˆf(x+)i
2
≤φ.
(72)
Thus,
E(x,x+)∼ppos

ˆf(x)i −ˆf(x+)i
2
≤
φ
1 −
q
φ
λ
· Ex∼pdata
h
ˆf(x)2
i
i
≤˜φ · Ex∼pdata
h
ˆf(x)2
i
i
.
(73)
In Assumption 4.3, set g = ˆfi and sum over i = 1, 2, · · · , k, we have that for some matrix ˜W,
Ex∼pdata
 ˜Wfeig(x) −ˆf(x)

2
2

≤kϵ.
(74)
Let matrix Q := Ex∼pdata[ ˆf(x) ˆf(x)⊤], we have that
Ex∼pdata
Q−1/2 ˆf(x) −ˆf(x)

2
2

≤2φ
λ · Ex∼pdata
 ˆf(x)

2
2

≤2φ
λ k
 
1 +
r
φ
λ
!
.
(75)
Thus,
Ex∼pdata
 ˜Wfeig(x) −Q−1/2 ˆf(x)

2
2

≤2kϵ + 4φ
λ k
 
1 +
r
φ
λ
!
.
(76)
Deﬁne matrix
M := Ex∼pdata
h
feig(x) ˆf(x)⊤Q−1/2i
(77)
Using Lemma B.1 and equation 76 we have
Ex∼pdata
feig(x) −MQ−1/2 ˆf(x)

2
2

≤2kϵ + 4φ
λ k
 
1 +
r
φ
λ
!
≤2kϵ + 8φ
λ k.
(78)
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
Thus, using Assumption 4.4, we have
Ex∼pdata
W ∗MQ−1/2 ˆf(x) −ey(x)

2
2

(79)
≤2Ex∼pdata
hW ∗feig(x) −ey(x)
2
2
i
+ 2Ex∼pdata
W ∗MQ−1/2 ˆf(x) −W ∗feig(x)

2
2

(80)
≤2ζ + 4B2kϵ + 16φ
λ B2k.
(81)
C.1
Proof for Section 4.1
Proof of Theorem 4.7. We ﬁrst show that with high probability, Lλ( ˆf) is small. Consider the follow-
ing decomposition
Lλ(f) −bLλ(f) = T1 + T2 + T3,
(82)
where
T1 = E
hf(x) −f(x+)
2i
−bE
hf(x) −f(x+)
2i
,
(83)
T2 = λ Tr

E
h
f(x)f(x)⊤i2
−bE
h
f(x)f(x)⊤i2
,
(84)
T3 = −2λ

Tr

E
h
f(x)f(x)⊤i
−Tr

bE
h
f(x)f(x)⊤i
.
(85)
Here we use E to denote expectation over population distribution, and bE to denote expectation
over the empirical dataset. Since ∥f(x) −f(x+)∥2 ≤4C2
f, using the uniform convergence bound
via Rademacher complexity and Talagrand’s Contraction Lemma (Ledoux and Talagrand, 1991),
we have that with probability at least 1 −δ
6,
T1 ≤8Cf bRnpre(F) + 4C2
f
s
log(6/δ)
2npre
.
(86)
Notice that
T2 ≤2C2
fλ ·
X
i,j
E [f(x)if(x)j] −bE [f(x)if(x)j]
 ,
(87)
we have that with probability at least 1 −δ
6,
T2 ≤2C2
fλk2 · Cf bRnpre(F) + 2C2
fλk2 · 2C2
f
s
log(6k2/δ)
2npre
.
(88)
Notice that
T3 ≤2λ ·
E
f(x)2
2

−bE
f(x)2 ,
(89)
we have that with probability at least 1 −δ
6,
T3 ≤2λ · Cf bRnpre(F) + 2λ · C2
f
s
log(6/δ)
2npre
.
(90)
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
Thus, with probability at least 1 −δ
2, we have the following inequality for all f ∈F:
Lλ(f) −bLλ(f) ≤(8Cf + 2C3
fλk2 + 2Cfλ) · bRnpre(F) + (4C2
f + 4C4
fλk2 + 2C2
fλ) ·
s
log(6k2/δ)
2npre
.
(91)
When the RHS of equation 91 (which we refer as “RHS” below) is smaller than 1
2 ˜φ−φ, we have that
Lλ( ˆf) ≤φ + RHS ≤1
2
˜φ.
(92)
Thus, following the same proof as Theorem 4.5, we know that there exists a linear head W ∈Rr×k
deﬁned as
W = W ∗· Ex∼pdata
h
feig(x) ˆf(x)⊤i
· Ex∼pdata[ ˆf(x) ˆf(x)⊤]−1,
(93)
such that
Ex∼pdata
W ˆf(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

≤2ζ + 4B2kϵ + 4(φ + RHS)
λ
B2k.
(94)
Since λ > 2˜φ, we have
Ex∼pdata[ ˆf(x) ˆf(x)⊤]−1
2 ≤2 and

h
feig(x) ˆf(x)⊤i
2 ≤2, thus ∥W∥F ≤
4B. Using uniform convergence bound again, we have that with probability at least 1 −δ
2,
Ex∼pdata
c
W ˆf(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

≲ζ + B2k(ϵ + φ + RHS
λ
) + BCf ·
s
log(1/δ)
nds
.
(95)
Since c
W = 0 gives trivial test loss 1, we can add an additional term to equation 95 to also cover
the case when the RHS of equation 91 is larger than 1
2 ˜φ −φ, as follows:
Ex∼pdata
c
W ˆf(x) −⃗y(x)
2
2

(96)
≲ζ + B2k(ϵ + φ + RHS
λ
) +
C4
fk2λ
˜φ −2φ
 
bRnpre(F) +
s
log(k2/δ)
npre
!
+ BCf
s
log(1/δ)
nds
(97)
≤ζ + B2k(ϵ + φ
λ) +
C4
fk2λ + B2k
˜φ −2φ
 
bRnpre(F) +
s
log(k2/δ)
npre
!
+ BCf
s
log(1/δ)
nds
,
(98)
where the second inequality uses λ > 2˜φ > ˜φ −2φ.
D
Proofs for Section 5
D.1
Proof for Example 5.1
Proof of Theorem 5.3. Deﬁne ˆU = [e1, e2, · · · , es]⊤∈Rs×d. We can verify that
E(x,x+)∼ppos
hf ˆU(x) −f ˆU(x+)
2
2
i
= 0
(99)
and
Ex∼pdata
h
f ˆU(x)f ˆU(x)⊤i
= I.
(100)
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
Thus, we can view f ˆU as the feig in Section 4.
Let U ∈Rk×d and i ∈[k] such that
E(x,x+)∼ppos[(fU(x)i −fU(x+)i)2] = 0.
(101)
Notice that x and x+ only differs on the s + 1-th to d-th dimensions, we know that Ui is 0 on the
s + 1-th to d-th dimensions. Thus, we have that Ui is in the span of e1, e2, · · · , es, and as a result
Assumption 4.3 holds wiht ϵ = 0.
Since the downstream task’s label is equal to xi for i ∈[s], we can set W ∗= e⊤
i and we would
have
Ex∼pdata

(W ∗f ˆU(x) −⃗y(x))2
= 0.
(102)
Hence Assumption 4.4 holds with α = 0 and B = 1.
Applying Theorem 4.5 ﬁnishes the proof for the linear function class case.
For the case of universal function approximators, without loss of generality we assume the
downstream task’s label only depends on the ﬁrst dimension of x, i.e., y(x) = sgn(x1). When
k ≤2d−1, we can construct a function f : X →Rk such that for every diemnsion j ∈[k], we
have f(x)j =
√
k when x2:d viewed as a binary number equals to j, otherwise f(x)j = 0. It can be
veriﬁed that Lλ(f) = 0 hence f is a minimizer of the contrastive loss. However, f(x) is agnostic to
the ﬁrst dimension of x, hence the downstream error is at least 1.
D.2
Proof for Example 5.4
Proof of Theorem 5.6. For any vector h ∈{−1, 1}s, we deﬁne function bin(h) ∈{0, 1, · · · , 2s −1} be
the function that maps h to the corresponding number when viewing 1
2(h+1) as binary. Since bin(·)
is a one-to-one mapping, we can deﬁne U ∈{k × d} such that the i-th row of U satisﬁes: the ﬁrst s
dimensions equal to
√
k · bin−1(i −1), and the rest d −s dimensions are 0. Let bias vector b ∈Rk
such that every dimension is −
√
k · (r −1). We have fU,b(x) =
√
k · ebin(x1:s)+1 ∈Rk.
Since Ex∼pdata[fU,b(x)fU,b(x)⊤] = I and E(x,x+)∼ppos[∥fU,b(x) −fU,b(x+)∥2
2] = 0, we can view fU,b
as the feig in Section 4. Assumption 4.4 naturally hold wihth B = 1.
For Assumption 4.3, consider a function fU ′,b′
∈
FReLU and index i
∈
[k] such that
E(x,x+)∼ppos

(fU ′,b′(x)i −fU ′,b′(x+)i)2
= 0. Suppose there exist ¯x ̸= ¯x′ and their augmentations
x, x′ such that fU ′,b′(x)i > fU ′,b′(x′)i. Then, there must be (Ui)r+1:d ̸= 0 and σ(U⊤
i x) > 0. This
suggests that there must exist another ˜x which is also an augmentation of ¯x but σ(U⊤
i x) ̸= σ(U⊤
i ˜x).
Hence, we have
E(x,x+)∼ppos

(fU ′,b′(x)i −fU ′,b′(x+)i)2
> 0,
(103)
leading to contradiction. Hence, we know that fU ′,b′(x)i = fU ′,b′(x′)i, so (fU ′,b′)i can only be a
function of x1:s. Therefore, there exists a vector w ∈Rk such that fU ′,b′(x)i = w⊤fU,b(x), which
means Assumption 4.3 holds with ϵ = 0. Applying Theorem 4.5 ﬁnishes the proof for equation 27.
The result about universal function approximators follows the same proof as for Theorem 5.3
execpt for constructing the function using the last (d −s) dimensions rather than the last (d −1)
dimensions.
D.3
Proof for Example 5.7
Proof of Theorem 5.9. Let idx be the index such that x ∈Sidx, and deﬁne function feig(x) = √m · eidx.
It can be veriﬁed that feig satisﬁes equation 15 and equation 16. For f ∈FLip,κ and i ∈[m], deﬁne
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
g(x) = f(x)i. Suppose Ex∼pdata[g(x)2] = 1, we can chooose m data x1, x2, · · · , xm such that xi ∈Si
and 1
m
P
i∈[m] g(xi)2 ≤1. Deﬁne vector ˜w ∈Rm such that ˜wi =
1
√m · g(xi). We have
Ex∼pdata
h
( ˜w⊤feig(x) −g(x))2i
= 1
m
X
i∈[m]
Ex∼Si

(g(xi) −g(x))2
(104)
≤1
m
X
i∈[m]
κ2ρ2 = κ2ρ2.
(105)
Thus, feig satisﬁes Assumption 4.3 with ϵ = κ2ρ2.
Since the data in the same Si have the same downstream label, we know that Assumption 4.4
holds with B = √r and α = 0. Thus, applying Theorem 4.5 ﬁnishes the proof for the upper bound.
For the lower bound, Let set ˜S be the union of the 1
2r0 sets among those r0 clusters that have
the largest sizes. When k ≤1
2 · r0, we can construct a function that maps all data in ˜S to 0, hence
the ﬁnal error would be at least 1
2.
D.4
Proof for Example 5.10
Proof of Theorem 5.12. For any vector h ∈{−1, 1}s, we deﬁne function bin(h) ∈{0, 1, · · · , 2s −1}
be the function that maps h to the corresponding number when viewing 1
2(h + 1) as binary. Since
bin(·) is a one-to-one mapping, we can deﬁne U ∈{k × s} such that the i-th row of U equal to
√
k
γ−1 ·bin−1(i−1). Let bias vector b ∈Rk be such that every dimension is
√
k
γ−1(−s−(γ−1)(s−1)). We
have f conv
U,b (x) =
√
k·ebin(xt:t+s−1)+1 ∈Rk, where t is the starting position of the informative patch in x.
It can be veriﬁed that Ex∼pdata[f conv
U,b (x)f conv
U,b (x)⊤] = I and E(x,x+)∼ppos[
f conv
U,b (x) −f conv
U,b (x+)

2
2] = 0.
Also, Assumption 4.4 holds with B = 1 when viewing feig = f conv
U,b .
Suppose some function f conv
ˆU,ˆb and dimension i ∈[k] satisﬁes
E(x,x+)∼ppos

f conv
ˆU,ˆb (x)i −f conv
ˆU,ˆb (x+)i
2
= 0.
(106)
Then, we know that for any x ∈pdata, suppose we deﬁne ˜x as the vector that replaces spurious
dimensions of x with 0. Notice that ˜x is in the support of x’s augmentations, and the model is
continuous, we know f conv
ˆU,ˆb (x)i = f conv
ˆU,ˆb (˜x)i Further notice that for any two data x, x′ with the same
informative patch (location might be different) and corresponding ˜x, ˜x′, there must be f conv
ˆU,ˆb (˜x)i =
f conv
ˆU,ˆb (˜x′)i due to the structure of the convolutional neural networks. Thus, We have f conv
ˆU,ˆb (x)i =
f conv
ˆU,ˆb (x′)i. This suggests that the funciton f conv
ˆU,ˆb (·)i is in the span of f conv
U,b , hence ﬁnishes the proof
for the upper bound.
For the lower bound, we note that due to the lack of invariance to informative patch location,
we can construct a network with d·2s-dimensional output that satisﬁes equation 15 and equation 16.
When then output dimension is less than d · 2s−1, there would exist a minimizer of the contrastive
loss that merges d · 2s−1 pairs of clusters. If every pair of clusters has different downstream labels,
there would be at least 1
2 loss incurred due to the data being mapped to the same feature, hence
ﬁnishes the proof for the lower bound.
28
