
===== PAGE 1 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated
Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Anurag J. Vaidya1∗
ajvaidya@bwh.harvard.edu
Felix Meissen2
t-femeissen@microsoft.com
Daniel C. Castro2
dacoelh@microsoft.com
Shruthi Bannur2
shruthi.bannur@microsoft.com
Tristan Lazard2
t-tlazard@microsoft.com
Drew F. K. Williamson3
drew.williamson@emory.edu
Faisal Mahmood1
faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu
Javier Alvarez-Valle2
jaalvare@microsoft.com
Stephanie L. Hyland2
stephanie.hyland@microsoft.com
Kenza Bouzid2†
kenza.bouzid@microsoft.com
1Mass General Brigham, Boston, USA
2Microsoft Health Futures, Cambridge, UK
3Emory University, Atlanta, USA
Abstract
Digitized histopathology analysis involves
complex, time-intensive workflows and spe-
cialized expertise, limiting its accessibil-
ity.
We introduce Nova,
an agentic
framework that translates scientific queries
into executable analysis pipelines by it-
eratively generating and running Python
code. Nova integrates 49 domain-specific
tools (e.g., nuclei segmentation, whole-slide
encoding) built on open-source software,
and can also create new tools ad hoc. To
evaluate such systems, we present Slide-
Quest, a 90-question benchmark—verified
by
pathologists
and
biomedical
scien-
tists—spanning data processing, quantita-
tive analysis, and hypothesis testing. Un-
like prior biomedical benchmarks focused
on knowledge recall or diagnostic QA,
SlideQuest demands multi-step reason-
ing, iterative coding, and computational
problem solving.
Quantitative evalua-
tion shows Nova outperforms coding-agent
baselines, and a pathologist-verified case
study links morphology to prognostically
relevant PAM50 subtypes, demonstrating
its scalable discovery potential.
∗Work done during internship at Microsoft.
† Corresponding author
Keywords: Agentic Histopathology Anal-
ysis, Agent benchmarking, and Automated
discovery
Data and Code Availability
SlideQuest is
constructed from the TCGA Breast Invasive Car-
cinoma (BRCA), with whole-slide images (WSIs)
and metadata obtained from the GDC por-
tal (Heath et al., 2021). Additionally, data from
PanopTILs (Liu et al., 2024), MoNuSeg (Kumar
et al., 2019, 2017), Kumar (Kumar et al., 2017),
and TCGA-Uniform Tumour (Komura, 2022) is
used. Table C.1 provides links to public datasets.
Agent framework and benchmark code is at
https://github.com/microsoft/nova-agent.
Institutional Review Board (IRB)
Pro-
posed use of public datasets was reviewed by
home institution.
Under policy, use of de-
identified public datasets is classified as Not Hu-
man Subjects Research [per 45§46.102(e)(1)(ii),
45§46.102(e)(5)].
Guidance and data reflection
questions are provided to researchers includ-
ing considerations to support representativeness,
transparency and intended use.
1. Introduction
Histopathology is the gold standard for cancer di-
agnosis and treatment planning. The digitization
arXiv:2511.11324v1  [cs.CL]  14 Nov 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
of glass histology slides has allowed computa-
tional advances, such as predicting primary sites
in cancers of unknown origin (Lu et al., 2021)
and developing multimodal prognostic biomark-
ers (Jaume et al., 2024a).
However, the sheer
scale and complexity of these data present a sig-
nificant barrier.
Effective workflows often re-
quire multi-step processing and narrow, special-
ized tools, creating a gap between the questions
researchers want to ask and their ability to an-
swer them without extensive programming or
bioinformatics expertise.
Recent
advances
in
large
language
mod-
els
(LLMs)
and
open-source
histopathology
tools (Zhang et al., 2025) create an opportu-
nity to bridge this gap. Instead of designing be-
spoke workflows for each study, an LLM-based
system equipped with domain-specific tools could
autonomously generate and execute analysis
pipelines in response to natural language queries.
However, evaluating such flexible systems re-
mains difficult: existing medical artificial intel-
ligence (AI) benchmarks primarily assess text-
based knowledge through multiple-choice ques-
tions (Singhal et al., 2023; Nori et al., 2023)
or single-image visual question-answering (VQA)
tasks on static, pre-processed images (He et al.,
2020; Lau et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2024), which fail
to capture the iterative reasoning, planning, and
coding required for computational workflows.
To address this, we introduce Nova, an agentic
framework that enables complex histopathology
data analysis through a natural language inter-
face. Nova uses a core LLM to interpret user
query, generate Python code, and orchestrate
a suite of modular, custom tools for multi-step
analysis directly on whole-slide images (WSIs)
and associated data.
Unlike prior approaches
that rely on fine-tuned models for narrow tasks
such as diagnosis or VQA (Lyu et al., 2025; Ghe-
zloo et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025), Nova sup-
ports dynamic, interactive, and dataset-level sci-
entific discovery without requiring instruction-
fine-tuned models. It integrates 49 histopathol-
ogy analysis tools (e.g., nuclei segmentation and
classification, tissue detection, supervised classi-
fication experiments) built on trusted open soft-
ware packages, making it easily extensible.
We further introduce SlideQuest, a bench-
mark
of
90
questions
designed
to
evaluate
computational
agents
in
pathology.
The
tasks span four categories, including pyramidal
data interrogation (DataQA), cellular analysis
(CellularQA), histology region of interest (ROI)
understanding (PatchQA), and gigapixel slide-
level experimentation (SlideQA). Each question
requires multi-step reasoning, iterative coding,
and computational problem solving, in addition
to image captioning and knowledge recall.
All
questions are independently verified by both a
pathologist and a biomedical scientist, ensuring
clinical and scientific validity. SlideQuest pro-
vides a rigorous testbed for evaluating agentic
systems on scientifically relevant computational
tasks.
In summary, our core contributions are:
1. Nova: a modular agentic framework that
dynamically writes and executes Python
code to build custom workflows from nat-
ural language queries,
without requiring
instruction-fine-tuned models;
2. A library of 49 custom histopathology analy-
sis tools, built on open-source software, inte-
grated into Nova to support diverse biomed-
ical tasks;
3. SlideQuest: a computational benchmark
of 90 pathologist- and scientist-verified ques-
tions for evaluating agentic workflows in
pathology, released publicly for the commu-
nity to extend further;
4. Comprehensive quantitative evaluation and
a pathologist-verified interactive case study
using Nova to link morphological properties
to prognostically relevant PAM50 molecular
subtypes (Parker et al., 2009);
5. Failure case analysis with examples to high-
light practical issues encountered by agentic
frameworks.
2. Related Works
Agent-based frameworks are increasingly applied
to healthcare tasks.
Prior work has explored
multi-agent collaboration for sequential diagno-
sis (Tu et al., 2025; Nori et al., 2025), medi-
cal QA and VQA on benchmark datasets (Kim
et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025; He et al., 2025), and
orchestration of domain-specific tools for open-
ended reasoning in oncology (Ferber et al., 2025)
or radiology (Fallahpour et al., 2025). Other sys-
tems integrate with clinical infrastructure, such
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
as electronic health records, to automate work-
flow tasks (Jiang et al., 2025). While these ap-
proaches highlight the promise of agentic meth-
ods in medicine, they are typically text-focused
and do not work directly with raw data modali-
ties, like whole-slide images.
Several agentic systems have recently been pro-
posed for computational pathology.
Lyu et al.
(2025) combined pretrained pathology-specific
models in a pipelined ensemble for WSI classi-
fication and report generation.
Ghezloo et al.
(2025) and Sun et al. (2025) designed navigation-
based agents that traverse WSIs with fine-tuned
captioning or multimodal models for diagnosis-
focused VQA. Similarly, Chen et al. (2025a)
augmented a region-level model with naviga-
tion tools for open-ended diagnosis. These ap-
proaches, however, focus narrowly on diagnos-
tic outputs, rely on fine-tuned models, and of-
ten operate on simplified ROIs or thumbnails
of WSIs rather than directly engaging with full-
resolution WSIs. By contrast, Nova works na-
tively with WSIs and associated metadata, scales
beyond single slides to dataset-level tasks, and
leverages modular open-source tools without re-
quiring instruction-tuned models for orchestra-
tion.
Evaluating dynamic agentic systems requires
benchmarks that move beyond static question
answering to capture the complexity of multi-
step reasoning and dataset-scale analysis. Most
medical LLM benchmarks evaluate text-based
knowledge via multiple-choice exams or curated
QA datasets (Singhal et al., 2023; Nori et al.,
2023; Arora et al., 2025; Bedi et al., 2025).
Multimodal benchmarks such as PathVQA (He
et al., 2020), PathMMU (Sun et al., 2024), and
SlideBench-VQA (Chen et al., 2025b) extend to
pathology but rely on static captions, automat-
ically generated questions, or compressed slide
embeddings. These often produce unanswerable
or trivial questions and remain limited to single-
image reasoning. More importantly, they include
questions for which an image is not necessary;
an LLM only baseline in (Chen et al., 2025b),
achieves 45% accuracy. While Chen et al. (2025a)
evaluate an agent on whole-slide data, the focus
is restricted to diagnosis and the dataset is not
public. To date, no benchmark supports rigor-
ous evaluation of computational agents perform-
ing iterative reasoning, coding, and dataset-level
analysis in pathology. SlideQuest fills this gap
by providing 90 pathologist- and scientist-verified
tasks that demand multi-step workflows, tool or-
chestration, and hypothesis testing.
3. NOVA
Nova is a modular agentic framework—based on
CodeAct (Wang et al., 2024) and developed using
smolagents (Roucher et al., 2025)—that dynam-
ically generates and executes Python code to or-
chestrate tool usage and answer user queries for
scalable computational analysis (Figure 1).
3.1. NOVA Framework
Nova is organized around three main compo-
nents: (i) a core LLM, (ii) a Python 3.11 inter-
preter (Appendix D) interacting with the user’s
file system, and (iii) a collection of modular
tools (Section 3.2, Appendix E). User queries
may include paths to data such as WSIs, ROIs,
or associated metadata (Appendix F). To pro-
cess a query, Nova first dynamically constructs
a system prompt with three elements: (i) gen-
eral instructions for code generation (default
from smolagents1); (ii) tool descriptions includ-
ing docstrings, inputs, and outputs; and (iii) any
special instructions from the user. The combined
prompt and query are passed to the core LLM,
which produces structured JSON blocks contain-
ing both thought and code fields. The code is
executed by the interpreter and results are fed
back to the LLM for the next iteration, enabling
a running memory of the reasoning process. The
loop continues for up to 20 iterations, or until the
LLM determines that the query has been fully an-
swered. The core LLM thereby plays a vital role
in Nova. These 20 iterations function as a per-
task “scratchpad”, and memory is cleared after
each question (except during the conversational
case study).
3.2. Tools
The custom tools form the operational back-
bone of Nova. Each tool is implemented as a
Python function with a clearly defined capability
and is intentionally designed to be atomic rather
1. GitHub: structured code agent.yaml
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Figure 1: Nova framework. The system takes as input a user query about one or more histology
images that are present on the file system. Using a collection of tools and in-built libraries,
a core LLM generates Python code to conduct multi-step data processing and analysis
towards answering the user query. Code is iteratively executed and fed back into the LLM
context to enable dynamic and multi-stage action.
than a multi-step workflow.
This modular de-
sign ensures reusability across diverse queries and
allows the LLM to flexibly compose tools into
larger, task-specific workflows.
To ensure con-
sistency and reliability, all tools follow a stan-
dardized docstring format (Figure E.1). All 49
tools in Nova are developed using open-source
computational pathology packages (Zhang et al.,
2025; Vaidya et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2025),
making them transparent and extensible. They
are organized into seven categories (Tables E.1
to E.7), covering tasks from localized ROI analy-
sis (e.g., nuclei segmentation and captioning) to
whole-slide processing (e.g., tissue segmentation,
patch extraction, and feature computation), as
well as full supervised experiments such as train-
ing attention-based MIL models.
Importantly,
Nova uses LLMs that require no instruction fine-
tuning to use the tools, lowering the barrier for
adding new functionality. In addition to custom
tools, Nova can access standard data science li-
braries (Table D.2) to autonomously generate ad-
ditional tools when needed.
4. SlideQuest
To evaluate the capabilities of Nova, we intro-
duce a novel 90-question computational bench-
mark, SlideQuest.
Every question is created
from scratch, carefully formulated and verified
to capture realistic challenges in computational
pathology. SlideQuest is constructed entirely
using publicly available data. Each question is
reviewed by a computational scientist as well as
a pathologist. See Appendix F for details on our
unified question format and example instances.
We release SlideQuest as an open benchmark,
intended not only as a rigorous testbed for Nova
but also as a template that the community can
build upon and expand to other modalities. De-
tails of datasets used to create SlideQuest are
available in A.
4.1. SlideQuest Categories
SlideQuest is organized into categories span-
ning the major spatial and analytical scales of
working with WSIs (Figure 2):
DataQA (25 Questions):
Evaluates funda-
mental understanding of WSIs as a data type.
Tasks include retrieving metadata from files (e.g.,
magnification, resolution, file format), switching
between magnification levels, extracting tissue
regions, and calculating basic tissue properties.
CellularQA
(25
Questions):
Nuclei-level
tasks testing the ability to segment and classify
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
DataQA (WSIs)
Basic understanding of 
working with WSIs
Example questions (n=25):
- Most common base magnification?
- Scanner make and objective power?
- Patch size across resolutions?
- Area of tissue (mm²)?
CellularQA (ROIs)
Quantitative analysis of 
cell-level properties 
Example questions (n=25):
- Neoplastic cellularity (%)?
- TIL density (cells/mm²)?
- Avg. neoplastic nuclei spacing (µm)?
- Median nuclear eccentricity?
PatchQA (ROIs)
Interpretation of histology 
ROI patches
Example questions (n=25):
- Metaplastic breast cancer?
- Corr. survival vs nuclear eccentricity?
- Cross-val. mutation prediction from 
CONCH embeddings?
SlideQA (WSIs)
Whole-slide reasoning 
and experimentation
Example questions (n=15):
- Risk of recurrence from WSI?
- Few-shot mutation prediction?
- Nuclear diffs. in top patches from 
mutation prediction with ABMIL?
0
10
20
30
Multiple patients
Samplewise outputs
Multiple patients
Summary output
Single patient
Questions per input/output type
0
20
40
60
General
Modelling
Pretrained model use
Statistics
Spatial analysis
Image processing
Basic data ingestion
WSI data ingestion
Questions per capability theme
DataQA
CellularQA
PatchQA
SlideQA
A
B
C
Figure 2: Overview of the SlideQuest benchmark. (A) The four benchmark categories. Listed
examples are abridged for illustration only; see full exemplars in Appendix F. (B) Diversity
of input and output types.
Also note that DataQA and SlideQA contain whole-slide
images (WSIs), whereas CellularQA and PatchQA operate on conventional flat images.
(C) Themes of capabilities required to answer the questions (full break-down in Table G.1).
nuclei, and perform quantitative analyses such as
computing cellular proportions or densities.
PatchQA (25 Questions):
Assesses the abil-
ity to work with histology regions-of-interest
(ROIs). Tasks include encoding ROIs using his-
tology foundation models, classifying them, and
comparing cellular properties.
SlideQA (15 Questions):
Evaluates WSI-
level reasoning and experimentation. Spans di-
agnosis from gigapixel slides, training and testing
supervised models, and retrieving slides based on
morphological or molecular similarity.
4.2. Task Diversity
SlideQuest has a mix of questions about single
or multiple patients, and with histological data as
conventional flat images or pyramidal WSIs. An-
swers are a structured combination of binary, cat-
egorical, and numeric values, and outputs may be
sample-wise or summaries over an entire dataset.
We further labelled our benchmark questions ac-
cording to 33 capabilities needed to answer them,
grouped into 8 major themes. Regarding data in-
gestion, SlideQuest largely demands handling
pyramidal WSI files and metadata.
Quantifi-
cation questions involve image processing and
precise spatial analysis (e.g. physical areas/dis-
tances, morphometry).
A few of the questions
also need general capabilities such as calcula-
tion and autonomous problem solving. Addition-
ally, many tasks require using pretrained mod-
els (for embedding, segmentation, classification)
and/or training models on the data provided or
extracted embeddings.
Lastly, most solutions
need statistical capabilities for e.g. summarising
outputs, cross-validating experiments, and test-
ing hypotheses. A detailed break-down of specific
capabilities is given in Table G.1.
4.3. Ground Truth and Evaluation
Depending on the question, the ground-truth an-
swers are derived from (i) expert-provided an-
notations, (ii) clinical diagnoses associated with
the patients, or (iii) human-written Python code.
Multi-step questions require a combination of
these approaches.
Every code-derived answer
is verified by a biomedical scientist to ensure
correctness and reproducibility.
Code to gen-
erate answers will be released with the bench-
mark.
All baselines are instructed to pro-
duce answers as JSON files following a prede-
fined schema in the question (Appendix F). The
answers are compared against a corresponding
ground truth JSON with task-specific tolerances
(details in Appendix F.1).
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
5. Experimental Setup
We benchmark Nova using Azure OpenAI LLM
endpoints. All experiments are conducted on ma-
chines with a single NVIDIA A100 GPU within
Azure ML. To account for LLM stochasticity and
to quantify variability, each experiment is re-
peated three times. Appendix H provides further
details.
5.1. Baselines
All coding baselines have access to the same
Python interpreter (Appendix D), with an iden-
tical set of libraries (Tables D.1 and D.2), and
are constrained to the same maximum number
of iterations (20). We compare Nova against:
LLM only:
Answers queries in natural lan-
guage and python code, but does not have access
to a coding environment and tools.
LLM with PI:
Has access to a Python 3.11
environment and can execute code only once, to
evaluate whether single-shot code execution is
sufficient to solve tasks.
LLM with PI and retries:
Can additionally
refine its code over multiple steps, correcting er-
rors along the way. Corresponds to Nova with-
out custom tools or custom system prompt.
6. Results
6.1. Performance on SlideQuest
Overall results. Figure 3 demonstrates the per-
formance of Nova against baselines across the
categories of SlideQuest. The LLM only base-
line achieves an average score of 0 on Slide-
Quest, confirming that the benchmark evalu-
ates computational rather than purely linguistic
ability.
Adding access to a Python interpreter
(LLM with PI) improves performance score to
0.154, showing that even single-shot code execu-
tion can solve a subset of tasks. However, with
LLM with PI and retries, this score reaches an
average score of 0.269 by iteratively refining code
and correcting errors. Nova achieves the high-
est performance on SlideQuest (0.477), out-
performing all baselines. Averaged across all 90
benchmark questions, Nova surpasses LLM with
PI by 0.323, and LLM with PI and retries by
0.208, establishing a clear margin of improvement
(Figure 3 and Table I.1). Nova sequentially an-
swered all 90 questions in 40 hours on a consumer
grade GPU, which can be further sped up if run-
ning jobs in parallel asynchronously. Per cate-
gory run-times are found in Appendix J.
Per
category
results.
Stratifying Nova’s
performance on SlideQuest by category reveals
substantial variation. Nova achieves its highest
score on DataQA (0.777) and its lowest on Cellu-
larQA (0.323). Strong performance on DataQA
is expected, as it primarily involves reading pyra-
midal metadata, a task well within the internal
knowledge of LLMs. However, despite this un-
derstanding of WSIs, Nova exhibits a failure rate
of 0.422 on SlideQA, highlighting the difficulty of
computational WSI analysis. Scores below 1 were
observed in CellularQA even when the correct
nuclei segmentation and classification tools were
used, reflecting the shortcomings of the current
HoverNet (Graham et al., 2019) model used. We
anticipate improved results as more robust tools
are developed and integrated into Nova (Adjadj
et al., 2025).
Different core LLMs.
Stronger LLMs (GPT-
5 vs. GPT-4.1) improve performance on harder
categories such as SlideQA (0.472 vs. 0.551) but
show no gain or even declines on easier ones
like DataQA (0.777 vs. 0.708). GPT-5 also in-
curs substantially longer runtimes (e.g., averag-
ing 47.4 vs. 31.2 hours for GPT-4.1 on SlideQA)
(Figure J.2). GPT-5-mini provides a strong al-
ternative to GPT-4.1, achieving the highest per-
formance on SlideQA while matching or under-
performing on the other categories (Table K.3).
Are custom tools needed?
To understand
the contribution of custom tools in our frame-
work, we compared Nova (with custom tools)
with two variants: (i) Nova (no custom tools),
which measures the core LLM’s ability to write
tools using its internal knowledge (ii) Nova (with
RAG), which does RAG on open-source com-
putational pathology software packages to cre-
ate tools based on user queries (details in Ap-
pendix K). Nova (with custom tools) shows clear
gains over Nova (no custom tools), with use of
custom tools outperforming across all categories
(e.g., +0.240 on DataQA, +0.171 on CellularQA,
+0.113 on PatchQA, +0.033 on SlideQA). Run
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
LLM only
LLM with PI
LLM with PI and retries
NOVA
A
B
Figure 3: A. Average score (higher is better) on SlideQuest stratified by benchmark category. B.
Failure rate (lower is better) showing the proportion of questions from SlideQuest on
which the approach achieved a zero score. Overall is the average of each category weighted
by number of questions in the category. Error bars are standard error of the mean from
3 trials. All results with GPT-4.1. “PI” stands for Python interpreter.
time increased substantially without tools but
did not improve performance: on DataQA, Nova
with tools required 2.76 h compared to 4.20 h
without tools, while also achieving higher per-
formance (0.777 vs. 0.537). Even against Nova
(with RAG), the custom tool version performs
better (overall performance of 0.337 with RAG
and 0.477 with custom tools), indicating that
RAG-based knowledge of documentation remains
insufficient for effective tool creation (Table K.1).
Overall, careful manual tool design remains es-
sential.
6.2. Failure Case Analysis
We manually reviewed all cases where Nova
achieved a score of 0 in all runs.
Failures fall
into four main categories: (i) tool limitations,
(ii) framework limitations, (iii) ignoring existing
tools or data, and (iv) LLM fabrications. Exam-
ples of failure cases are shown in Appendix L.
Tool limitations.
Tool issues occurred across
CellularQA, SlideQA, and PatchQA, due to in-
correct output from segmentation models or
image–text models, causing the final agent out-
put to be incorrect. Moreover, tools may present
results in a slightly different manner than pre-
sented in the task (for example, class names dif-
fering between the tool and task) causing the
model to occasionally omit relevant classes and
fabricate irrelevant ones.
Framework limitations.
The most common
issue was exceeding the Python interpreter’s op-
eration limit, a safeguard against infinite loops.
This caused premature termination even when
the code was correct, especially in computation-
heavy tasks like CellularQA and PatchQA. The
agent often retried using subsets of the data, pro-
ducing incomplete or incorrect answers.
Ignoring tools or data.
In some cases, the
agent recomputed values already provided by
tools (e.g., convexity of tissue regions in DataQA)
or rewrote code for existing functions (e.g., con-
tour area).
While not always incorrect, this
behavior sometimes caused failures and often
reduced efficiency.
The agent also overused
try/except blocks, skipping data that could have
been recovered.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Fabrications.
Failures
included
fabricating
data when inputs could not be loaded, or rely-
ing on simplistic heuristics (e.g., “darker nuclei
are cancerous”) instead of using tools.
6.3. Case Study
We demonstrate Nova’s ability to carry out a
comprehensive computational pathology work-
flow exploring the morphological features of the
four major PAM50 breast cancer subtypes: Lu-
minal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, and HER2-
enriched. Figure 4 shows similar to how scientists
would approach this task, we first task Nova to
gather relevant biological and clinical knowledge
about the PAM50 subtypes from the literature.
Next, we provide representative H&E WSIs for
each subtype and ask Nova to analyse them. It
defines a workflow involving tissue segmentation,
patch-level feature extraction, text-prompt sim-
ilarity analysis to localize subtype-specific fea-
tures, and nuclei segmentation. From these anal-
yses, Nova produces a comparative report that
highlights both shared and distinct characteris-
tics of the subtypes. The results closely match
known histopathological findings (Heng et al.,
2017). For instance, Luminal A tumours show
limited necrosis and abundant connective tis-
sue, whereas Basal-like tumours exhibit extensive
necrosis, inflammation, and immune infiltration.
This study demonstrates Nova’s ability to or-
chestrate complex computational workflows and
derive insights by integrating multiple tools and
biological knowledge, illustrating practical utility
in a real-world biomedical research scenario.
7. Discussion
Our findings show that strong performance on
SlideQuest requires structured tool use and
iterative coding, not natural language ability
alone. Even with correct tool composition, many
questions remain difficult due to current tool lim-
itations. Modular agentic systems like Nova can
readily incorporate stronger pretrained models as
they emerge, and we anticipate rapid community
progress on this benchmark. We also show Nova
is compatible with various LLMs, where stronger
models yield better results on challenging cate-
gories.
Finally, we highlight that custom tools
are essential; relying on LLM internal knowledge
or API documentation is insufficient. Advances
in automated tool creation and verification would
further strengthen such systems (W¨olflein et al.,
2025).
Limitations.
The evaluation mechanism in
SlideQuest
only checks the final
outputs.
Hence,
incorrect
intermediate
reasoning—
including fabricated data, random guessing, or
baseless tool calls—is not penalized. The frame-
work also does not distinguish between errors
arising from tool implementations and errors
from the agent’s use of the tools. Second, while
our 49 custom tools cover diverse histopathology
tasks, it is not feasible to anticipate every edge
case, and the tools themselves may contain mis-
takes, limiting scalability. Third, reproducibility
of agentic behaviour is an open challenge. The
relatively high variance across runs indicates
that
generated
pipelines
may
vary
between
executions,
making it difficult to guarantee
consistent outcomes.
Finally, TCGA includes
known limitations such as demographic biases
(Vaidya et al., 2024);
we hope the commu-
nity adds more diverse tasks to SlideQuest
independent on TCGA.
Conclusion.
We introduced Nova, a coding
agent framework for histopathology data analy-
sis equipped with 49 carefully engineered tools.
To rigorously evaluate its capabilities, we de-
veloped SlideQuest, a 90-question benchmark
spanning multiple analytical scales.
Across all
categories, Nova outperforms coding baselines,
demonstrating the necessity of domain-specific
tools. Additionally, in a pathologist-verified case
study linking morphology to prognostically rele-
vant PAM50 subtypes, we demonstrate Nova’s
scalable discovery potential.
Future Work.
We hope to quantify the time
savings with Nova for computational scientists.
While we use histopathology as a proof of con-
cept, the framework can be extended to other
biomedical modalities. By releasing the frame-
work, tools, and benchmark, we encourage the
community to build on Nova by creating robust
tools and SlideQuest by contributing new ques-
tions and tools to broaden its coverage.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Duration: 30sec  – Number of steps: 3 
Here’s a summary of the 5 most common morphological 
features for each PAM50 subtype presented in a table.
Duration: 8min35sec – Number of steps: 10 
Duration: 20sec – Number of steps: 2 
LLM
Python 
Interpreter
[Distribution of the PAM50 breast cancer subtypes within each  ...]
[The molecular basis of breast cancer pathological phenotypes …]
[Computational Methods for Breast Cancer Molecular Profiling  ...]
web_search
Selected tools
I will perform a web search to find review articles or studies that describe 
the morphological features associated with each PAM50 breast cancer 
subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Base-like, HER2-enriched).
search_results = web_search(query="histopathological 
morphological features of PAM50 breast cancer subtypes 
Luminal A Luminal B Basal-like HER2-enriched")
print(search_results)
Identify the five most common morphological features for 
each PAM50 subtypes from the literature and summarize 
them in a table.
Scientist
LLM
Python 
Interpreter
For each Luminal A subtype, all results are organized in the 
respective subdirectory, including similarity scores, top regions per 
feature, and cell segmentation overlays and JSONs.
Repeat the same workflow for the remaining subtypes.
extract_tissue
extract_tiles
extract_features
score_by_txt
visualize_sim
read_region
segment_nuclei
Selected tools
Let's break down the task for each subtype: 
1. Process the slides (tissue seg, patching, feature extraction) 
2. Score tiles by the feature prompt. 
3. Visualize similarity based on text prompt.
4. Identify top 5 regions with highest similarity. 
5. Extract and save these regions as images. 
6. Run cell segmentation on all extracted regions.
def process_subtype(
subtype, slide_path, subtype_dir, features
):
  extract_tissue_in_wsi(wsi_path=slide_path,… 
  extract_tissue_tiles(wsi_path=slide_path,…   
  extract_patch_features(wsi_path=slide_path,…
  for feature in features:
    score_tiles_by_text_in_a_wsi_tool(wsi_path=…
    visualize_text_prompt_similarity_win_wsi(wsi_path=…
  for region in regions: 
     read_rectangle_region_from_wsi(wsi_path=slide_path,… 
     segment_and_classify_nuclei_in_histology_roi(input_dir,…
Study the morphological features of four H&E WSIs in 
{input_dir}, each from Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, 
and HER2-enriched. Labels are available in {csv_file}.
Scientist
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal-like
HER2-enr
The workflow has been successfully completed. For each 
subtype and each of its 5 features, the following steps were 
performed: tissue segmentation, tile and feature extraction, 
tile scoring by feature, nuclei segmentation, …
All results and artifacts are saved in the respective 
subtype subdirectories for further analysis.
LLM
Python 
Interpreter
The comparison table shows which morphological features are 
present in each PAM50 subtype. Now, I will summarize which 
features are unique to a subtype and which are shared. I will also 
highlight key shared characteristics and unique features for each...
No tools
Selected tools
I have extracted all relevant features, I will now:
1. Summarize the cell segmentation results for each region and subtype
2. Compare the presence and frequency of each feature across 
subtypes, find which features are subtype-specific and which are shared. 
3. Cross-reference the observed morphological and cell segmentation 
results with established literature on PAM50 subtypes.
4. Create a comprehensive markdown report that summarizes all.
import pandas as pd
all_features = set()
for feats in features_dict.values():
    all_features.update(feats)
all_features = list(all_features)
comparison_tab = pd.DataFrame(index=all_features, 
columns=features_dict.keys())
for subtype, feats in features_dict.items():
    for feat in all_features:
        comparison_tab.loc[feat, subtype] = \
 
  '✓' if feat in feats else ''
Compare the morphological features across subtypes 
and identify subtype-specific and shared characteristics. 
Cross reference your findings with existing literature.
Scientist
[Distribution of the PAM50 breast cancer subtypes within each  ...]
[The molecular basis of breast cancer pathological phenotypes …]
[Computational Methods for Breast Cancer Molecular Profiling  ...]
I have identified the key article (PMC5499709) that discusses the 
morphological features.. I will now summarize the relevant sections 
of this article into a table focusing on the 5 most …
The markdown report has been generated and saved. It 
summarizes the detected morphological features, 
relates them to the biology of each PAM50 subtype, and 
discusses their clinical implications, with a clear table of 
cell segmentation results. 
You can find the report at 
`working_dir/20250906_130459/pam50_final_report.md`.
'report_preview': report_md[:1000] + '...'
working_dir
Figure 4: Case study showing the use of Nova to explore the morphological features associated with
PAM50 breast cancer subtypes (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, HER2-enriched) and
assess their relationship with tumour characteristics. Only the main steps are shown for
illustration purposes. The final report produced by Nova is shown in Figures B.1 and B.2
.
References
Benjamin Adjadj, Pierre-Antoine Bannier, Guil-
laume Horent,
Sebastien Mandela,
Aurore
Lyon,
Kathryn
Schutte,
Ulysse
Marteau,
Valentin
Gaury,
Laura
Dumont,
Thomas
Mathieu, et al. Towards comprehensive cellular
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
characterisation of h&e slides. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.09926, 2025.
Rahul K Arora, Jason Wei, Rebecca Soskin
Hicks, Preston Bowman, Joaquin Qui˜nonero-
Candela, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Michael Shar-
man, Meghan Shah, Andrea Vallone, Alex
Beutel, et al. Healthbench: Evaluating large
language models towards improved human
health. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08775, 2025.
Suhana Bedi, Hejie Cui, Miguel Fuentes, Alyssa
Unell,
Michael Wornow,
Juan M Banda,
Nikesh Kotecha, Timothy Keyes, Yifan Mai,
Mert Oez, et al.
Medhelm: Holistic evalua-
tion of large language models for medical tasks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23802, 2025.
Chengkuan Chen, Luca L Weishaupt, Drew FK
Williamson,
Richard J Chen,
Tong Ding,
Bowen Chen, Anurag Vaidya, Long Phi Le,
Guillaume Jaume, Ming Y Lu, et al. Evidence-
based diagnostic reasoning with multi-agent
copilot for human pathology.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.20964, 2025a.
Ying Chen, Guoan Wang, Yuanfeng Ji, Yan-
jun Li, Jin Ye, Tianbin Li, Ming Hu, Rong-
shan Yu, Yu Qiao, and Junjun He. Slidechat:
A large vision-language assistant for whole-
slide pathology image understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition Conference, pages 5134–5143,
2025b.
Tong Ding, Sophia J Wagner, Andrew H Song,
Richard J Chen, Ming Y Lu, Andrew Zhang,
Anurag J Vaidya, Guillaume Jaume, Muham-
mad Shaban, Ahrong Kim, et al. A multimodal
whole-slide foundation model for pathology.
Nature Medicine, pages 1–13, 2025.
Adibvafa Fallahpour,
Jun Ma,
Alif Munim,
Hongwei Lyu, and Bo Wang. Medrax: Medical
reasoning agent for chest x-ray. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.02673, 2025.
Dyke Ferber,
Omar SM El Nahhas,
Georg
W¨olflein, Isabella C Wiest, Jan Clusmann,
Marie-Elisabeth Leßmann, Sebastian Foersch,
Jacqueline Lammert, Maximilian Tschochohei,
Dirk J¨ager, et al. Development and validation
of an autonomous artificial intelligence agent
for clinical decision-making in oncology. Na-
ture cancer, pages 1–13, 2025.
Fatemeh Ghezloo,
Mehmet Saygin Seyfioglu,
Rustin Soraki, Wisdom O Ikezogwo, Beibin
Li,
Tejoram
Vivekanandan,
Joann
G
El-
more, Ranjay Krishna, and Linda Shapiro.
Pathfinder:
A multi-modal multi-agent sys-
tem for medical diagnostic decision-making
applied to histopathology.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.08916, 2025.
Simon Graham, Quoc Dang Vu, Shan E Ahmed
Raza, Ayesha Azam, Yee Wah Tsang, Jin Tae
Kwak, and Nasir Rajpoot. Hover-net: Simul-
taneous segmentation and classification of nu-
clei in multi-tissue histology images. Medical
Image Analysis, page 101563, 2019.
Xuehai He, Yichen Zhang, Luntian Mou, Eric
Xing, and Pengtao Xie.
Pathvqa:
30000+
questions for medical visual question answer-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10286, 2020.
Yexiao He, Ang Li, Boyi Liu, Zhewei Yao, and
Yuxiong He. Medorch: Medical diagnosis with
tool-augmented reasoning agents for flexible
extensibility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00235,
2025.
Allison P Heath, Vincent Ferretti, Stuti Agrawal,
Maksim An,
James C Angelakos,
Renuka
Arya, Rosita Bajari, Bilal Baqar, Justin HB
Barnowski, Jeffrey Burt, et al.
The nci ge-
nomic data commons. Nature genetics, 53(3):
257–262, 2021.
Yujing J Heng, Susan C Lester, Gary MK Tse,
Rachel E Factor, Kimberly H Allison, Laura C
Collins, Yunn-Yi Chen, Kristin C Jensen,
Nicole B Johnson, Jong Cheol Jeong, et al. The
molecular basis of breast cancer pathological
phenotypes. The Journal of pathology, 241(3):
375–391, 2017.
Guillaume Jaume, Anurag Vaidya, Richard J
Chen, Drew FK Williamson, Paul Pu Liang,
and Faisal Mahmood.
Modeling dense mul-
timodal interactions between biological path-
ways and histology for survival prediction.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 11579–11590, 2024a.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Guillaume
Jaume,
Anurag
Vaidya,
Andrew
Zhang, Andrew H. Song, Richard J. Chen,
Sharifa Sahai, Dandan Mo, Emilio Madrigal,
Long Phi Le, and Faisal Mahmood. Multistain
pretraining for slide representation learning in
pathology. In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 19–37. Springer, 2024b.
Yixing
Jiang,
Kameron
C.
Black,
Gloria
Geng, Danny Park, James Zou, Andrew Y.
Ng,
and Jonathan H. Chen.
Medagent-
bench: A virtual ehr environment to bench-
mark
medical
llm
agents.
NEJM
AI,
page AIdbp2500144, 2025.
doi:
10.1056/
AIdbp2500144.
URL https://ai.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/AIdbp2500144.
Yubin Kim, Chanwoo Park, Hyewon Jeong, Yik S
Chan, Xuhai Xu, Daniel McDuff, Hyeonhoon
Lee, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Cynthia Breazeal,
and Hae W Park. Mdagents: An adaptive col-
laboration of llms for medical decision-making.
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37:79410–79452, 2024.
D. Komura.
Universal encoding of pan-cancer
histology by deep texture representations. Cell
Reports, 38:110424, 2022.
doi:
10.1016/j.
celrep.2022.110424.
Neeraj Kumar, Ruchika Verma, Sanuj Sharma,
Surabhi Bhargava, Abhishek Vahadane, and
Amit Sethi.
A dataset and a technique for
generalized nuclear segmentation for computa-
tional pathology. IEEE transactions on medi-
cal imaging, 36(7):1550–1560, 2017.
Neeraj Kumar, Ruchika Verma, Deepak Anand,
Yanning Zhou, Omer Fahri Onder, Efstratios
Tsougenis, Hao Chen, Pheng-Ann Heng, Ji-
ahui Li, Zhiqiang Hu, et al.
A multi-organ
nucleus segmentation challenge. IEEE trans-
actions on medical imaging, 39(5):1380–1391,
2019.
Jason J Lau, Soumya Gayen, Asma Ben Abacha,
and Dina Demner-Fushman. A dataset of clin-
ically generated visual questions and answers
about radiology images. Scientific data, 5(1):
1–10, 2018.
Shangke Liu, Mohamed Amgad, Deeptej More,
Muhammad A Rathore, Roberto Salgado, and
Lee AD Cooper.
A panoptic segmentation
dataset and deep-learning approach for ex-
plainable scoring of tumor-infiltrating lympho-
cytes. NPJ Breast Cancer, 10(1):52, 2024.
Ming Y. Lu, Tiffany Y. Chen, Drew F. K.
Williamson, Ming Zhao, Mark Shady, Jana
Lipkova,
and Faisal Mahmood.
Ai-based
pathology predicts origins for cancers of un-
known primary.
Nature, 594(7861):106–110,
2021.
Xinheng Lyu, Yuci Liang, Wenting Chen, Mei-
dan Ding, Jiaqi Yang, Guolin Huang, Daokun
Zhang, Xiangjian He, and Linlin Shen. Wsi-
agents: A collaborative multi-agent system for
multi-modal whole slide image analysis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.14680, 2025.
Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKin-
ney, Dean Carignan, and Eric Horvitz. Capa-
bilities of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375, 2023.
Harsha Nori,
Mayank Daswani,
Christopher
Kelly, Scott Lundberg, Marco Tulio Ribeiro,
Marc Wilson, Xiaoxuan Liu, Viknesh Sounder-
ajah, Jonathan Carlson, Matthew P Lungren,
et al. Sequential diagnosis with language mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22405, 2025.
Joel S Parker, Michael Mullins, Maggie CU
Cheang, Samuel Leung, David Voduc, Tammi
Vickery, Sherri Davies, Christiane Fauron, Xi-
aping He, Zhiyuan Hu, et al. Supervised risk
predictor of breast cancer based on intrinsic
subtypes. Journal of clinical oncology, 27(8):
1160–1167, 2009.
Aymeric Roucher, Albert Villanova del Moral,
Thomas Wolf, Leandro von Werra, and Erik
Kaunism¨aki. ‘smolagents‘: a smol library to
build great agentic systems. https://github.
com/huggingface/smolagents, 2025.
George Shaikovski, Adam Casson, Kristen Sev-
erson,
Eric Zimmermann,
Yi Kan Wang,
Jeremy D Kunz, Juan A Retamero, Gerard
Oakley, David Klimstra, Christopher Kanan,
et al. Prism: A multi-modal generative founda-
tion model for slide-level histopathology. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.10254, 2024.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara
Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung,
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-
Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al.
Large language
models encode clinical knowledge. Nature, 620
(7972):172–180, 2023.
Yuxuan Sun, Hao Wu, Chenglu Zhu, Sunyi
Zheng, Qizi Chen, Kai Zhang, Yunlong Zhang,
Dan Wan, Xiaoxiao Lan, Mengyue Zheng,
et al.
Pathmmu:
A massive multimodal
expert-level benchmark for understanding and
reasoning in pathology.
In European Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 56–73.
Springer, 2024.
Yuxuan Sun, Yixuan Si, Chenglu Zhu, Kai
Zhang, Zhongyi Shui, Bowen Ding, Tao Lin,
and Lin Yang.
Cpathagent:
An agent-
based foundation model for interpretable high-
resolution pathology image analysis mimicking
pathologists’ diagnostic logic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.20510, 2025.
Tao
Tu,
Mike
Schaekermann,
Anil
Palepu,
Khaled Saab, Jan Freyberg, Ryutaro Tanno,
Amy Wang, Brenna Li, Mohamed Amin, Yong
Cheng, et al. Towards conversational diagnos-
tic artificial intelligence.
Nature, pages 1–9,
2025.
Anurag Vaidya, Richard J Chen,
Drew FK
Williamson,
Andrew
H
Song,
Guillaume
Jaume,
Yuzhe Yang,
Thomas Hartvigsen,
Emma C Dyer, Ming Y Lu, Jana Lipkova, et al.
Demographic bias in misdiagnosis by computa-
tional pathology models. Nature Medicine, 30
(4):1174–1190, 2024.
Anurag
Vaidya,
Andrew
Zhang,
Guillaume
Jaume,
Andrew
H
Song,
Tong
Ding,
Sophia J Wagner, Ming Y Lu, Paul Doucet,
Harry
Robertson,
Cristina
Almagro-Perez,
et al.
Molecular-driven foundation model
for
oncologic
pathology.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2501.16652, 2025.
Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe
Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Ex-
ecutable code actions elicit better llm agents.
In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, 2024.
Georg W¨olflein, Dyke Ferber, Daniel Truhn,
Ognjen
Arandjelovi´c,
and
Jakob
Nikolas
Kather. Llm agents making agent tools. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.11705, 2025.
Andrew
Zhang,
Guillaume
Jaume,
Anurag
Vaidya, Tong Ding, and Faisal Mahmood. Ac-
celerating data processing and benchmarking
of ai models for pathology.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.06750, 2025.
Yimin Zheng, Ernesto Abila, Eva Chrenkov´a, Ju-
liane Winkler, and Andr´e F Rendeiro. Lazys-
lide: accessible and interoperable whole slide
image analysis. BioRxiv, pages 2025–05, 2025.
Yinghao Zhu, Ziyi He, Haoran Hu, Xiaochen
Zheng, Xichen Zhang, Zixiang Wang, Junyi
Gao, Liantao Ma, and Lequan Yu.
Meda-
gentboard:
Benchmarking multi-agent col-
laboration
with
conventional
methods
for
diverse
medical
tasks.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2505.12371, 2025.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Supplementary Material
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis
and Discovery
We provide supplementary information Nova framework, SlideQuest, additional results, run
time analysis:
1. Section A: Details of datasets used for SlideQuest.
2. Section C: Links to public datasets used to construct SlideQuest.
3. Section D: Python 3.11 execution environment, allowed libraries, and operation limits.
4. Section E: Catalog of Nova tools (descriptions and categories).
5. Section F: Unified SlideQuest question schema with exemplars across categories.
6. Section G: Details on SlideQuest question types.
7. Section H: Experimental setup, including Nova configuration, LLM variants/parameters, and
the experiment runner.
8. Section I: Results of baseliens and Nova on SlideQuest.
9. Section J: Runtime vs. accuracy analyses across baselines and core LLMs.
10. Section K: Ablations of Nova on SlideQuest.
11. Section L: Failure analysis with representative cases (tool limitations, recomputation, and
other modes).
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix A. Datasets
Questions in SlideQuest are drawn from multiple publicly available datasets, all derived from
TCGA WSIs but annotated at different levels of granularity.
For CellularQA, we used three
nuclei-level annotation datasets: MoNuSeg (Kumar et al., 2019, 2017) (51 images), Kumar (Kumar
et al., 2017) (30 images), and PanopTILs (Liu et al., 2024). Each contains expert-verified nuclei
boundaries and classifications. For PanopTILs, we restricted to the training set, which provides
larger annotated regions of interest (ROIs) compared to the test set. We further limited PanopTILs
to ROIs containing neoplastic and/or immune cells and only included patients with overall survival
data. After filtering, we obtained 589 ROIs from PanopTILs (111 patients). For DataQA and
SlideQA, we retrieved WSIs for the patients included above. When multiple WSIs existed for a
patient, we randomly selected one, yielding 151 WSIs in total. For PatchQA’s diagnostic capability,
we used six BRCA patients (2 invasive ductal, lobular, and metaplastic) from TCGA Uniform
tumour (UT) dataset (Komura, 2022), which provides tumour-level ROIs. We retained only three
tumour ROIs per patient from the TCGA-UT dataset, randomly sampled when more than three
were available. While SlideQuest is developed using breast cancer as an exemplar, we strongly
encourage the community to extend this benchmark framework to other disease types.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix B. Case study final report
final_report.md
2025-09-08
1 / 1
PAM50 Subtype Morphological Features Exploration
Overview
This report summarizes the key morphological features detected in H&E WSIs for each PAM50 breast cancer
subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, HER2-enriched), relates them to the underlying tumor biology, and
discusses their clinical implications. Cell segmentation results are summarized in the table below:
Cell Type
Luminal A
Luminal B
Basal-like
HER2-enriched
Background
0
4
1
5
Connective
32
3
32
13
Inflammatory
2
11
86
6
Necrosis
1
7
1
6
Neoplastic
3
180
10
8
Non-Neoplastic Epithelial
0
0
3
3
Subtypes characterics
Luminal A
Morphological Features: Low nuclear grade, well-formed tubules/glandular structures, low mitotic rate,
minimal necrosis, low pleomorphism.
Biology: Luminal A tumors are typically ER-positive, have low proliferation rates, and retain glandular
differentiation. The predominance of connective tissue and low neoplastic/necrotic cell counts reflect their
indolent nature.
Clinical Implications: Luminal A cancers have the best prognosis, respond well to hormone therapy, and
rarely require chemotherapy. Their morphology supports a less aggressive clinical course.
Luminal B
Morphological Features: Intermediate to high nuclear grade, less tubule formation, higher mitotic rate,
moderate pleomorphism, possible necrosis.
Biology: Luminal B tumors are also ER-positive but have higher proliferation and more genomic instability
than Luminal A. The high neoplastic cell count and increased necrosis reflect their more aggressive biology.
Clinical Implications: Luminal B cancers have a worse prognosis than Luminal A, may require chemotherapy
in addition to hormone therapy, and are more likely to recur.
Figure B.1: Final analysis markdown report (Part 1 of 2) produced by Nova for the exploration of
the morphological features associated with molecular PAM50 breast cancer subtypes.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
final_report_2.md
2025-09-08
1 / 1
Basal-like
Morphological Features: High nuclear grade, high mitotic rate, pushing margins, central necrosis, syncytial
growth pattern.
Biology: Basal-like tumors are often triple-negative (ER-, PR-, HER2-), highly proliferative, and genomically
unstable. The high inflammatory and connective cell counts, along with necrosis, reflect their aggressive and
immune-infiltrated nature.
Clinical Implications: Basal-like cancers have the poorest prognosis, limited targeted therapy options, and
are more likely to respond to chemotherapy. Their morphology is associated with rapid growth and early
metastasis.
HER2-enriched
Morphological Features: High nuclear grade, frequent comedo-type necrosis, solid growth pattern, high
mitotic rate, prominent nucleoli.
Biology: HER2-enriched tumors overexpress the HER2 protein, leading to increased proliferation and genomic
instability. The mix of neoplastic, necrotic, and connective cells reflects their high grade and aggressive
behavior.
Clinical Implications: HER2-enriched cancers have an intermediate to poor prognosis but benefit from HER2-
targeted therapies (e.g., trastuzumab). Their morphology supports the need for aggressive treatment.
Shared and Unique Features
Shared: High mitotic rate and high nuclear grade are present in both Basal-like and HER2-enriched
subtypes, reflecting their aggressive biology.
Unique: Luminal A is distinguished by low grade and well-formed structures; Basal-like by necrosis and
inflammation; HER2-enriched by comedo-type necrosis and solid growth.
Conclusion
The detected morphological features and cell segmentation results are coherent with the known biology and
clinical behavior of each PAM50 subtyp found in 'The molecular basis of breast cancer pathological
phenotypes' (PMC5499709). These findings can inform prognosis and guide treatment decisions in breast
cancer management.
Figure B.2: Final analysis markdown report (Part 2 of 2) produced by Nova for the exploration of
the morphological features associated with molecular PAM50 breast cancer subtypes.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix C. Links to datasets
Table C.1: Public datasets used to construct SlideQuest.
Dataset
Link
TCGA BRCA (WSI + metadata)
https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/
PanopTILs
https://sites.google.com/view/panoptils/
MoNuSeg
https://monuseg.grand-challenge.org/Data/
Kumar
Google Drive link
TCGA-Uniform Tumour (TCGA-UT)
https://huggingface.co/datasets/dakomura/tcga-ut
Appendix D. Python environment
A local Python 3.11 environment with basic modules and data science libraries is used for code
execution and file system operations.
The interpreter automatically raises an error if the code
generated by the LLM imports packages outside the allowed set. Security-sensitive packages such
as os, which enable unrestricted access to the file system, are disallowed by default. A maximum
number of 107 code operations is allowed to avoid infinite loops. Packages and libraries available in
the interpreter are listed in Tables D.1 and D.2.
Table D.1: Default Python packages available to all baselines
Category
Modules
Data structures and iteration
collections, itertools
Date and time handling
datetime, time
Mathematical functions
math
Random number generation
random
Text and regular expressions
re
Statistical utilities
stat, statistics
Data structures (queues)
queue
Unicode utilities
unicodedata
Data serialization and file paths
json, pathlib
Table D.2: Additional Python data science libraries available to all baselines
Category
Libraries
Numerical computing
numpy, scipy
Data analysis and statistics
pandas, statsmodels
Machine learning and survival analysis
sklearn, sksurv, lifelines
Visualization
matplotlib, seaborn
Image processing and computer vision
cv2, skimage, PIL, openslide
Deep learning
torch, torchvision
Graphs and single-cell analysis
networkx, scanpy
Data storage and serialization
zarr, h5py, pickle
Geospatial and spatial data
geopandas, spatialdata, shapely
Utilities (I/O, file ops, progress bars)
pathlib, shutil, tqdm
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix E. NOVA tools
The core tools within NOVA for tasks like cell segmentation, feature extraction, metadata parsing,
and region-of-interest analysis are applicable to histopathology images from any tissue.
Table E.1: Histology ROI captioning and analysis tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
caption single histology image tool
Generate a descriptive caption for a single his-
tology image.
caption and summarize set of histology images tool
Caption multiple histology images and provide
a summary.
score single histology image using text tool
Score a histology image based on text-based cri-
teria.
encode histology roi tool
Encode histology region of interest into vector
representation.
Table E.2: Dataset processing check tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
dataset of wsi get valid slide paths tool
Get valid WSI file paths from a directory with
optional extension filtering.
dataset of wsi check tissue segmentation exists tool
Check if tissue segmentation files exist for a
dataset of WSIs.
dataset of wsi check patch coordinates exist and schema tool
Check if patch coordinate files exist and validate
their schema for a dataset of WSIs.
dataset of wsi check patch features exist and schema tool
Check if patch feature files exist and validate
their schema for a dataset of WSIs.
dataset of wsi check slide features exist and schema tool
Check if slide-level feature files exist and validate
their schema for a dataset of WSIs.
Table E.3: Dataset processing pipeline tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
dataset of wsi tissue segmentation tool
Perform tissue segmentation on a dataset of WSI
files.
dataset of wsi patch coordinate extraction tool
Extract patch coordinates from tissue regions in
a dataset of WSIs.
dataset of wsi patch features extraction tool
Extract patch-level features from a dataset of
WSIs using foundation models.
dataset of wsi slide features extraction tool
Extract slide-level features from patch fea-
tures
for
a
dataset
of
WSIs
using
slide
encoders
like
TITAN
(Ding
et
al.,
2025),
MADELEINE
(Jaume
et
al.,
2024b),
and
PRISM (Shaikovski et al., 2024).
dataset of wsi create score heatmap tool
Create score heatmaps overlaid on WSIs for vi-
sualization and analysis.
Table E.4: Documentation retriever tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
trident docs retriever
Search and retrieve information from Trident
documentation for WSI processing.
lazyslide docs retriever
Search and retrieve information from LazySlide
documentation for WSI analysis.
hovernet docs retriever
Search and retrieve information from HoverNet
documentation for nuclei segmentation and clas-
sification.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Table E.5: Nuclei segmentation and contour analysis tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
segment and classify nuclei in histology roi tool
Segment and classify nuclei in histology ROIs
into six classes using HoVer-Net.
get contour area
Calculate the area of a contour.
get contour perimeter
Calculate the perimeter of a contour.
get contour convex hull
Calculate the convex hull of a contour.
Table E.6: Single WSI-level processing and analysis tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
visualize text prompt similarity on wsi tool
Visualize text prompt similarity scores overlaid
on WSI tissue regions.
predict wsi label tool
Predict WSI-level class labels using text-based
zero-shot classification.
generate wsi report with prism tool
Generate a pathology report for a WSI using the
PRISM model.
caption single wsi tool
Generate descriptive captions for a single WSI
by clustering and summarizing.
score tiles by text in a wsi tool
Score individual tiles in a WSI based on text-
based similarity criteria.
retrieve properties from wsi tool
Retrieve metadata and properties from a single
WSI file.
extract tissue in wsi tool
Perform tissue segmentation on a single WSI file.
extract tissue tiles in wsi tool
Extract tissue tiles/patches from a single WSI
file.
extract patch features in wsi tool
Extract patch-level features from a single WSI
using foundation models.
encode wsi tool
Encode a single WSI with slide-level features us-
ing LazySlide backend.
check tissue segmentation key in wsi tool
Check if tissue segmentation results exist for a
specific key in WSI.
check tile key in wsi tool
Check if tile extraction results exist for a specific
key in WSI.
check patch features key in wsi tool
Check if patch features exist for a specific key in
WSI.
check slide features key in wsi tool
Check if slide-level features exist for a specific
key in WSI.
check clustering key in wsi tool
Check if clustering results exist for a specific key
in WSI.
check reduction key in wsi tool
Check if dimensionality reduction results exist
for a specific key in WSI.
access zarr hierarchy
Access and explore the hierarchical structure of
WSI Zarr files.
read zarr data tool
Read data from a Zarr file.
visualize wsi tool
Create visualizations of WSI with optional tissue
contours and tile overlays.
reduce single wsi patch feature space tool
Reduce dimensionality of patch features using
PCA, UMAP, or t-SNE.
run leiden clustering tool
Perform Leiden clustering on patch features for
morphological analysis.
visualize morphological clusters on wsi tool
Visualize morphological clusters overlaid on
WSI tissue regions.
get topk close patch coords to embedding space clusters tool
Get coordinates of top-k patches closest to em-
bedding space cluster centers.
read rectangle region from wsi tool
Extract rectangular regions from WSI at speci-
fied coordinates and magnification.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Table E.7: WSI classification tools available in Nova.
Tool Name
Description
train test wsi classification mil model
Train and test multiple instance learning models
for WSI classification.
create wsi classification splits
Create train/validation/test splits for WSI clas-
sification datasets.
prepare wsi classification metadata
Prepare metadata files for WSI classification ex-
periments.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
def dataset_of_wsi_tissue_segmentation_tool(
job_dir: str,
wsi_source: str,
skip_errors: bool = False,
search_nested: bool = False,
holes_are_tissue: bool = True,
batch_size: int = 64,
segmentation_model_name: str = 'grandqc',
tissue_seg_confidence_thresh: float = 0.5,
overwrite: bool = False,
skip_specific_wsi: list[str] | None = None,
keep_only_these_wsi: list[str] | None = None,
max_workers: int = 16,
) -> dict:
"""
Run tissue segmentation on multiple WSIs and return the locations of output files.
Optimized to process multiple WSIs, but can be used with selected WSIs as well.
Tissue segmentation is the first step for WSI pipelines (patching, feature extraction, etc.).
Options control whether holes are treated as tissue, thresholding for tissue prediction,
and artifact removal.
Notes:
- If overwrite=True, run segmentation on all valid slides in `wsi_source`.
- Creates:
{job_dir}/contours_geojson/{wsi_name}.geojson
{job_dir}/contours/{wsi_name}.jpg
{job_dir}/thumbnails/{wsi_name}.jpg
{job_dir}/_config_segmentation.json
{job_dir}/_logs_segmentation.txt
- If overwrite=False, check for existing results and skip processing if found.
- 'grandqc' performs artifact filtering; 'hest' does not.
- GeoJSON outputs are GeoPandas GeoDataFrames with `tissue_id` and `geometry`.
Prerequisites:
- `job_dir` exists and is writable.
- `wsi_source` contains valid WSI files.
Returns (dict):
- 'dir_with_geojson_contours'
- 'dir_with_tissue_contours_jpg'
- 'dir_with_slide_thumbnails'
- 'tissue_segmentation_log_file'
- 'tissue_segmentation_config_file'
- 'number_of_processed_segmentations'
- 'operation_log'
Args:
job_dir: Path to job directory.
wsi_source: Path to input WSI directory.
skip_errors: Skip WSIs with errors (default=False).
search_nested: Recursively search `wsi_source` (default=False).
holes_are_tissue: Treat holes as tissue (default=True).
batch_size: Batch size for tile processing (default=64).
segmentation_model_name: ['grandqc','hest'] (default='grandqc').
tissue_seg_confidence_thresh: Confidence threshold (default=0.5).
overwrite: Rerun segmentation if True (default=False).
skip_specific_wsi: List of WSIs to skip (default=None).
keep_only_these_wsi: List of WSIs to keep (default=None).
max_workers: Number of workers (default=16).
"""
Figure E.1: Example Python tool function: dataset of wsi tissue segmentation tool
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix F. SlideQuest question format
Each question in SlideQuest follows a unified schema that specifies the task,
inputs,
and evaluation criteria.
The schema enforces consistency across queries while remaining
flexible to different modalities and levels of analysis.
Core fields include metadata (id,
data type, dataset relative path), the main question, and any additional instructions or
output instructions required for reproducibility. Evaluation is standardized through the id column
and columns to compare and tolerance, which define how agent outputs are matched to ref-
erence answers.
Tolerances may be expressed as numeric thresholds (e.g., allowable percent-
age error for quantitative tasks) or as sets of acceptable responses for text-based answers.
Each query also records a biomedical rationale and verification flags (is pathologist verified,
is biomedical scientist verified) to ensure clinical and scientific validity. Table F.1 summarizes
the schema fields, and Figures F.1 to F.4 shows example instances from each benchmark category.
Whenever relevant, question schema’s additional instructions key specifies to set the seed to
42 for non-deterministic packages (numpy, random, torch, etc.) to ensure reproduciliblity between
ground truth answers as well as between different runs of the Nova and baselines.
Table F.1: User query schema used in Nova.
Field
Description
id
Unique identifier for the query.
data type
Type of data involved in the task (e.g., single WSI, multiple WSIs, summary
of multiple WSIs).
dataset relative path
Relative path to the dataset.
question
The actual biomedical or computational question to be answered.
additional instructions
Supplementary instructions to provide clarifications.
output instructions
Explicit requirements on how outputs must be formatted and stored.
id column
Column name used to compare outputs of agent with ground truth answers.
columns to compare and tolerance
Fields that are compared and their respective tolerances.
rationale
Biomedical motivation or reasoning for why the task is important.
is pathologist verified
Boolean indicating whether the question has been verified by a pathologist.
is biomedical scientist verified
Boolean indicating whether the question has been verified by a biomedical
scientist.
{
"id": "21",
"data_type": "single_wsi",
"slide_relative_path": "tcga_brca_to_use/WSI_flat/TCGA-EW-A1P8-01Z-00-DX1.E9852193-8CDD-49EF-B49B-
DA6931198F0D.svs",
"question": "For the histology slide at {path_to_slide}, what percentage of the tissue pixels are more
strongly stained with hematoxylin than with eosin?",
"additional_instructions": "Your working directory is: {working_dir}, which you can use to save
intermediate outputs and results. Work with the lowest resolution level of the whole slide image.
You can set non-tissue regions to white before computing stains. Apply 0-1 scaling to each stain
matrix before computing percentages. Consider a pixel hematoxylin-dominant if its hematoxylin value
exceeds the eosin value by more than 0.02. Report the hematoxylin-dominant tissue percentage to
two decimal places.",
"output_instructions": "You **must** save your outputs as a JSON file in your working directory. Create
a file named `answer.json` containing your results as a **list of dictionaries** (JSON array). Use
4-space indentation for readability. The slide name should not include the file extension.
hematoxylin_percent **must** be a float rounded to two decimal places. For example, save the
following format: [{\"slide_id\": \"slide_id1\", \"hematoxylin_percent\": 44.23}] to the answer.
json file with proper indentation.",
"id_column": "slide_id",
"columns_to_compare_and_tolerance": {
"hematoxylin_percent": 0.1
},
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
"rationale": "This calculation quantifies the proportion of tissue dominated by nuclear staining (
hematoxylin) versus cytoplasmic/protein staining (eosin), which can indicate cellularity and tissue
composition.",
"is_pathologist_verified": true,
"is_biomedical_scientist_verified": true
}
Figure F.1: Example DataQA question schema
{
"id": "1",
"data_type": "multiple_wsi",
"dataset_relative_path": "panoptils_idc_mini/rgbs/",
"question": "For each breast histology image in {path_to_dataset}, what is the neoplastic cellularity
percentage, defined as (number of neoplastic cell nuclei / total number of nuclei) * 100?",
"additional_instructions": "Your working directory is: {working_dir}, which you can use to save
intermediate outputs and results. Don`t consider any background nuclei.",
"output_instructions": "You **must** save your outputs as a JSON file in your working directory. Create
a file named `answer.json` containing your results as a **list of dictionaries** (JSON array). Use
4-space indentation for readability. Percentages should be float values between 0 and 100 with
exactly 2 decimal places. For example, if the image name is `sample1.tif` and the neoplastic
cellularity is 54.32%, you should save: [{\"slide_id\": \"sample1\", \"
neoplastic_cellularity_percentage\": 54.32}] to the answer.json file with proper indentation.",
"id_column": "slide_id",
"columns_to_compare_and_tolerance": {
"neoplastic_cellularity_percentage": 0.15
},
"rationale": "Accurate quantification of neoplastic cellularity is essential for assessing neoplastic
burden, eligibility for molecular testing, and making informed treatment decisions in oncology.",
"is_pathologist_verified": true,
"is_biomedical_scientist_verified": true
}
Figure F.2: Example CellularQA question schema
{
"id": "25",
"data_type": "multiple_wsi",
"dataset_relative_path": "panoptils_idc_mini/rgbs/",
"path_to_metadata": "panoptils_idc_mini/metadata/OS_days/splits.csv",
"question": "Does adding the average nuclear solidity of neoplastic cells improve Cox proportional
hazards model prediction of survival compared to using only clinical covariates (age, stage) in the
dataset at {path_to_dataset}? Report the mean C-index IPCW across 5 folds for both conditions",
"rationale": "Nuclear solidity is a proxy for morphological abnormality; testing its added prognostic
value over clinical variables assesses integration of imaging biomarkers with standard clinical
data",
"additional_instructions": "Your working directory is: {working_dir}. Metadata with survival time, event
status, clinical covariates (age, stage), patient image paths, and premade splits are in {
path_to_metadata} (column `OS` indicates event status, 1 being event observed). To determine the
absolute path to the actual image files, join {path_to_dataset} (the dataset root) with the value
from the `image_name` column. For each image, compute mean neoplastic nuclear solidity, then
average per patient. Using 5-fold CV, train two Cox models: (1) clinical covariates only, (2)
clinical covariates and neoplastic nuclear solidity. Compute test-set C-index IPCW per fold, then
report mean across folds. Fix random seeds (NumPy, PyTorch, scikit-learn, torch, random, etc.) to
42. A higher risk score indicated by higher values!",
"output_instructions": "You **must** save your results to a JSON file named `answer.json` in your
working directory. The file should contain a list of dictionaries with your outputs. Use json.dump
() with indent=4 for readability. Each object must contain `model` (clinical_only/
clinical_plus_solidity) and `mean_c_index` (3 decimals). For example: [{\"model\": \"clinical_only
\", \"mean_c_index\": 0.652}, {\"model\": \"clinical_plus_solidity\", \"mean_c_index\": 0.687}]",
"id_column": "model",
"columns_to_compare_and_tolerance": {
"mean_c_index": 0.15
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
},
"is_pathologist_verified": true,
"is_biomedical_scientist_verified": true
}
Figure F.3: Example PatchQA question schema
{
"id": "11",
"data_type": "multiple_wsi",
"dataset_relative_path": "tcga_brca_to_use/WSI_flat",
"path_to_metadata": "tcga_brca_to_use/tcga_brca_metadata/OS_days/metadata.csv",
"question": "Classify all WSIs at {path_to_dataset} into high and low likelihood of TP53 mutation and
report the number of cases in each category. For patients who also have survival data, compare mean
overall survival days between the predicted high- and low-likelihood groups and test whether the
difference is statistically significant. Consider both censored and uncensored patients.",
"rationale": "TP53 alterations are linked to prognosis; relating predicted mutation propensity to
survival helps validate risk stratification from histology-derived features.",
"additional_instructions": "Your working directory is: {working_dir}, which you can use to save
intermediate outputs and results. Use {path_to_metadata} for patient ids, slide ids, and survival
days. Use a two-sided Mann-Whitney U test to compare survival days distributions between groups.
Patients missing survival data can be ignored for the survival comparison.",
"output_instructions": "You must save your results to a JSON file named `answer.json` in your working
directory. The file must contain a list of dictionaries (JSON array). Use json.dump() with indent=4
for readability. The dictionary must include numeric keys: `number_high_likelihood` (int), `
number_low_likelihood` (int), `avg_survival_days_in_high_likelihood` (float, round to 1 decimal
place), `avg_survival_days_in_low_likelihood` (float, round to 1 decimal place), and `p-value` (
float, round to 3 decimal places). For example: [{\"number_high_likelihood\": 38, \"
number_low_likelihood\": 74, \"avg_survival_days_in_high_likelihood\": 820.5, \"
avg_survival_days_in_low_likelihood\": 1160.2, \"p-value\": 0.010}].",
"id_column": null,
"columns_to_compare_and_tolerance": {
"number_high_likelihood": 0.15,
"number_low_likelihood": 0.15,
"avg_survival_days_in_high_likelihood": 1.0,
"avg_survival_days_in_low_likelihood": 1.0,
"p-value": 0.15
},
"is_pathologist_verified": true,
"is_biomedical_scientist_verified": true
}
Figure F.4: Example SlideQA question schema
F.1. SlideQuest evaluation
To align keys between output and ground truth JSON files, we use Hungarian matching, which
minimizes penalties from alternative but valid formatting choices. Values are then compared using
task-specific tolerances: percentage thresholds for quantitative outputs (15% in this study) and
sets of acceptable responses for textual outputs. A value is scored as 1 if it falls within tolerance,
and 0 otherwise. If no JSON is produced, the question is given a score of 0. Overall benchmark
performance is reported as the average score across all questions, including the ones where no output
JSON was produced. To define failure rate, we find the percentage of questions where the score is
0 or no valid JSON file is created.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix G. SlideQuest details
Table G.1: Numbers of questions requiring each type of capability, per benchmark category.
Theme
Capabilities
CellularQA DataQA PatchQA SlideQA All
WSI data ingestion
WSI reading
0
12
0
14
26
WSI metadata retrieval
0
20
0
0
20
WSI patching
0
3
0
2
5
Basic data ingestion
Image reading
25
0
25
0
50
CSV reading
0
0
19
7
26
Embeddings reading
0
0
0
1
1
Image processing
Texture analysis
2
0
0
0
2
Image filtering
0
1
0
0
1
Stain estimation
0
1
0
0
1
Spatial analysis
Morphometry
10
4
10
1
25
Spatial calibration
3
8
2
0
13
Distance computation
6
0
1
0
7
Statistics
Summary statistics
23
7
8
4
42
Statistical analysis
2
0
8
5
15
Cross-validation
0
0
11
3
14
Model evaluation
0
0
10
3
13
Attention-based patch retrieval
0
0
0
1
1
Pretrained model use Nuclei cell type classification
13
0
12
1
26
Nuclei segmentation
14
0
10
1
25
Nuclei detection
11
0
2
0
13
Tissue segmentation
2
10
0
0
12
Zero-shot WSI interpretation
0
0
0
10
10
Patch embedding
0
0
7
2
9
Zero-shot multi-patch interpretation
0
0
6
0
6
WSI embedding
0
0
0
3
3
Artefact segmentation
0
1
0
0
1
Modelling
Supervised learning
0
0
10
1
11
Survival modelling
0
0
3
0
3
Few-shot learning
0
0
0
2
2
Multiple-instance learning
0
0
0
2
2
Clustering
1
0
0
0
1
General
Scalar calculation
3
6
0
0
9
Problem solving
0
0
0
2
2
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix H. Experimental setup
H.1. NOVA configuration
Nova is built based on smolagents library. We use the CodeAgent class with the parameters detailed
in Table H.1. We provide a dynamic set of tools depending on the tools category chosen by the user.
Nova with tools, i.e., the default configuration, uses all 49 tools. When evaluating on SlideQuest,
no baseline and Nova has access to web search. The web search tool is added when evaluating the
qualitative case study. Additionally, we increase the maximum number of steps to 200 and memory
reset after query to False for the case study to emulate a real interactive conversation with memory.
Table H.1: Default Nova configuration parameters
Parameter
Description
tools
all tools in Nova
model
SmolAgentsLLM configured with GPT-4.1 by default
additional authorized imports
list of authorized libraries
executor type
local
planning interval
null
use structured outputs internally
True
verbosity level
1
provide run summary
False
max steps
20
name
codeagent with tools
description
The code agent has access to many tools for whole slide image data
processing and analysis. Additionally, it can use the following libraries
(list of libraries).
special instructions
## Security Restrictions
- **Strict restrictions:** You are absolutely not allowed to use these
modules in your code: ['os']
## Core Objectives & Approach
- Your primary goal is to help the user fully achieve their objective.
- Always address the user's underlying question or need, not just the
surface request. Ensure your answer is complete and fully covers the
question and any related aspects.
- **Task Decomposition:** Break down complex tasks into smaller,
manageable subtasks and address them sequentially. Execute each
subtask one by one, using the appropriate tools and libraries.
## Library & Tool Usage
- **Task Resolution:** Only generate tools and functions from scratch
if provided tools and libraries are not able to solve the task.
- **Computer Vision:** When working with image processing, contours,
segmentation, or spatial analysis tasks, make use of existing
computer vision libraries (cv2, skimage, scipy.spatial and others)
before writing custom implementations from scratch.
- The machine you're running in has a gpu. Make sure to always use cuda
:0 when a device is required to run a tool.
## Output & Communication
- Display or share outputs---such as figures, files, or results---
directly with the user whenever possible
- Exactly follow user instructions on output format, file names, and
other details
- Communicate in a sincere, helpful, and user-focused way. Be clear,
honest, and avoid unnecessary jargon.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
H.2. LLMs variants and parameters
We use Azure OpenAI endpoints to access the LLMs and benchmark 4 variants of GPT models:
GPT-4.1, GPT-4.1-mini, GPT-5-mini, and GPT-5. The experiments were run within Azure ML,
which provides streamlined monitoring and experiment management. For the GPT-4.1 variants,
we used a fixed temperature=0 to reduce stochasticity and max retries=20 to overcome any internal
LLM errors.
GPT-5 series were run with temperature=1 as it is currently the only permitted
value by the OpenAI API for GPT-5 series models. We use the default reasoning configuration for
GPT-5. All the baselines were run with the same LLM parameters for fair comparison.
H.3. Experiments Runner
We provide an experimental runner to streamline the execution of SlideQuest experiments. Built
on hydra, it allows dynamic configuration of baselines and system arguments. The runner manages
the agent’s lifecycle—including stepwise execution, tool invocation, and result aggregation—while
handling evaluation, logging, and saving of intermediate model outputs in separate folders.
By
resetting the agent’s state and providing a fresh working directory for each query, it prevents leakage
between benchmark tasks. This setup also facilitates parallelization, which is particularly useful
since each experiment is repeated three times. The runner will be open-sourced as part of the Nova
framework.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix I. SlideQuest Results
Table I.1: SlideQuest average score (higher is better) over 3 runs with standard error. Average
score is weighted by number of questions in each category. All results with GPT-4.1.
Baseline
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
LLM only
0.000 ± 0.000
0.000 ± 0.000
0.000 ± 0.000
0.000 ± 0.000
0.000
LLM with PI
0.377 ± 0.053
0.058 ± 0.011
0.039 ± 0.022
0.133 ± 0.067
0.154
LLM with PI and retries
0.443 ± 0.019
0.152 ± 0.025
0.217 ± 0.012
0.259 ± 0.002
0.269
Nova
0.777 ± 0.030
0.323 ± 0.017
0.335 ± 0.016
0.472 ± 0.027
0.477
Table I.2: Failure rate on SlideQuest (lower is better) over 3 runs with standard error. Average
failure is weighted by number of questions in each category. All results with GPT-4.1.
Baseline
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
LLM only
1.000 ± 0.000
1.000 ± 0.000
1.000 ± 0.000
1.000 ± 0.000
1.000
LLM with PI
0.580 ± 0.060
0.773 ± 0.027
0.947 ± 0.035
0.867 ± 0.067
0.783
LLM with PI and retries
0.507 ± 0.013
0.627 ± 0.027
0.613 ± 0.013
0.667 ± 0.039
0.596
Nova
0.200 ± 0.023
0.320 ± 0.023
0.413 ± 0.013
0.422 ± 0.059
0.330
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix J. Run time analysis
1
2
3
4
Duration (hours)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Average Score (↑)
DataQA (n=25)
LLM only
(0.302±0.039 h, 0.000±0.000)
LLM with PI
(4.083±0.103 h, 0.377±0.075)
LLM with PI and retries
(4.248±0.230 h, 0.443±0.034)
NOVA
(2.762±0.950 h, 0.777±0.052)
1
2
3
4
5
Duration (hours)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Average Score (↑)
CellularQA (n=25)
LLM only
(0.306±0.015 h, 0.000±0.000)
LLM with PI
(0.862±0.785 h, 0.058±0.019)
LLM with PI and retries
(0.915±0.728 h, 0.152±0.043)
NOVA
(4.523±0.569 h, 0.323±0.030)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Duration (hours)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Average Score (↑)
PatchQA (n=25)
LLM only
(0.315±0.002 h, 0.000±0.000)
LLM with PI
(0.496±0.052 h, 0.039±0.038)
LLM with PI and retries
(1.246±0.067 h, 0.217±0.021)
NOVA
(8.680±1.429 h, 0.334±0.028)
0
10
20
30
40
Duration (hours)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Average Score (↑)
SlideQA (n=15)
LLM only
(0.213±0.007 h, 0.000±0.000)
LLM with PI
(0.206±0.003 h, 0.133±0.115)
LLM with PI and retries
(2.016±2.017 h, 0.259±0.003)
NOVA
(31.192±12.940 h, 0.472±0.047)
Figure J.1: Run time duration (h) vs. average score on SlideQuest for LLM only, LLM with PI,
LLM with PI and retries, and Nova. All results with GPT-4.1. Legend shows average
run time and score with baseline name.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
5
10
15
20
25
Duration (hours)
0.650
0.675
0.700
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
Average Score (↑)
DataQA (n=25)
GPT-4.1-mini
(3.467±1.531 h, 0.685±0.031)
GPT-4.1
(2.762±0.950 h, 0.777±0.052)
GPT-5-mini
(5.458±1.338 h, 0.767±0.050)
GPT-5
(23.128±8.238 h, 0.708±0.047)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Duration (hours)
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Average Score (↑)
CellularQA (n=25)
GPT-4.1-mini
(5.130±6.957 h, 0.107±0.105)
GPT-4.1
(4.523±0.569 h, 0.323±0.030)
GPT-5-mini
(3.601±1.409 h, 0.266±0.121)
GPT-5
(13.287±1.447 h, 0.346±0.014)
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
Duration (hours)
0.275
0.300
0.325
0.350
0.375
0.400
0.425
0.450
Average Score (↑)
PatchQA (n=25)
GPT-4.1-mini
(15.599±6.842 h, 0.319±0.051)
GPT-4.1
(8.680±1.429 h, 0.334±0.028)
GPT-5-mini
(8.136±1.135 h, 0.354±0.041)
GPT-5
(14.417±5.889 h, 0.417±0.035)
10
20
30
40
50
60
Duration (hours)
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
Average Score (↑)
SlideQA (n=15)
GPT-4.1-mini
(10.212±5.563 h, 0.422±0.154)
GPT-4.1
(31.192±12.940 h, 0.472±0.047)
GPT-5-mini
(8.524±4.255 h, 0.582±0.052)
GPT-5
(47.443±16.596 h, 0.551±0.062)
Figure J.2: Run time duration (h) vs. average score on SlideQuest for Nova with GPT-4.1-mini,
GPT-4.1, GPT-5-mini, and GPT-5. Legend shows average run time and score with
baseline name.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
Appendix K. NOVA ablations
K.1. Are custom tools needed?
Nova includes 49 custom tools, each designed and validated by experienced biomedical scientists.
To assess whether such handcrafted tools are necessary, we compare Nova against variants where
the LLM must generate tools on its own. In the first setting, Nova (no custom tools), the LLM
relies solely on its base knowledge to create ad hoc functions.
In the second, Nova (with RAG), the LLM is given access to vector databases built from the
GitHub repositories of Trident2, LazySlide3, and HoVerNet4 (the open-source libraries used for tool
development), allowing it to retrieve domain-specific knowledge when creating new tools. The agent
can query these repositories to dynamically generate and compose tools on the fly. This baseline
assesses whether access to raw domain-specific resources is sufficient to replace carefully designed
tools.
Table K.1: Average score over 3 runs with standard error for Nova (no custom tools), Nova (with
RAG), and Nova (with custom tools) on SlideQuest (higher is better). Average score
is weighted by number of questions in each category. All results with GPT-4.1.
Baseline
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
Nova (no custom tools)
0.537 ± 0.017
0.152 ± 0.018
0.222 ± 0.026
0.439 ± 0.010
0.326
Nova (with RAG only)
0.556 ± 0.006
0.165 ± 0.018
0.213 ± 0.015
0.464 ± 0.013
0.337
Nova (with custom tools)
0.777 ± 0.030
0.323 ± 0.017
0.335 ± 0.016
0.472 ± 0.027
0.477
Table K.2: Failure percentage over 3 runs with standard error for Nova (no custom tools), Nova
(with RAG), and Nova (with custom tools) on SlideQuest (lower is better). Average
failure is weighted by number of questions in each category. All results with GPT-4.1.
Baseline
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
Nova (no custom tools)
0.413 ± 0.013
0.387 ± 0.035
0.560 ± 0.061
0.378 ± 0.022
0.441
Nova (with RAG only)
0.400 ± 0.000
0.573 ± 0.013
0.573 ± 0.013
0.400 ± 0.039
0.496
Nova (with custom tools)
0.200 ± 0.023
0.320 ± 0.023
0.413 ± 0.013
0.422 ± 0.059
0.330
2. https://github.com/mahmoodlab/TRIDENT
3. https://github.com/rendeirolab/LazySlide
4. https://github.com/vqdang/hover net
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
K.2. Choice of core LLM
Table K.3: Performance of different core LLMs on SlideQuest. Average score (higher is better)
over 3 runs with standard error. Average score is weighted by number of questions in
each category. Prices are taken from https://platform.openai.com/docs/pricing and
are the sum of input and output prices per 1M tokens.
Baseline
Price per 1M
tokens
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
GPT-4.1-mini
$2.00
0.686 ± 0.018
0.107 ± 0.060
0.319 ± 0.030
0.422 ± 0.089
0.379
GPT-4.1
$10.00
0.777 ± 0.030
0.323 ± 0.017
0.335 ± 0.016
0.472 ± 0.027
0.477
GPT-5-mini
$2.25
0.767 ± 0.029
0.266 ± 0.070
0.354 ± 0.024
0.582 ± 0.030
0.482
GPT-5
$11.15
0.708 ± 0.047
0.346 ± 0.008
0.417 ± 0.020
0.551 ± 0.036
0.498
Table K.4: Failure percentage of different core LLMs on SlideQuest. Failure percentage (lower
is better) over 3 runs with standard error. Average failure percentage is weighted by
number of questions in each category. Prices are taken from https://platform.openai.
com/docs/pricing and are the sum of input and output prices per 1M tokens.
Baseline
Price per 1M
tokens
DataQA
(n=25)
CellularQA
(n=25)
PatchQA
(n=25)
SlideQA
(n=15)
Average
GPT-4.1-mini
$2.00
0.280 ± 0.023
0.653 ± 0.109
0.547 ± 0.048
0.511 ± 0.135
0.496
GPT-4.1
$10.00
0.200 ± 0.023
0.320 ± 0.023
0.413 ± 0.013
0.422 ± 0.059
0.330
GPT-5-mini
$2.25
0.213 ± 0.035
0.373 ± 0.096
0.373 ± 0.035
0.289 ± 0.022
0.315
GPT-5
$11.15
0.270 ± 0.025
0.280 ± 0.023
0.373 ± 0.027
0.244 ± 0.022
0.297
Appendix L. NOVA Failure Analysis
We show specific failure cases from Nova highlighting different modes of failure.
Question 2
from DataQA (Figure L.1) shows failure due to tool issues. In solving this task, Nova uses tool
score single histology image using text tool, which incorrectly predicts the image class. As an
example of the agent ignoring existing tools or data, we look at question 24 from DataQA (Fig-
ure L.2), where Nova fails as it incorrectly recomputes the convexity of tissue regions. Specfically,
Nova uses the full tissue area when recomputing convexity, instead of using the tissue area without
including holes. The convexity measure is already provided by tool extract tissue in wsi tool
(the docstring also mentioning this), which Nova has already referenced to obtain the tissue seg-
mentation.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
(a) Question
I have three images of a tumour from a breast cancer patient at /.../tcga_ut_brca_zeroshot/TCGA-AR-A2LR.
When considering all the images, does the patient have invasive lobular, invasive ductal, or metaplastic
breast cancer? Additional instructions: ...
(b) Code (partial)
------------------------------------ Step 2 ------------------------------------
classes = ['invasive lobular', 'invasive ductal', 'metaplastic']
results = []
for img_path in image_paths:
result = score_single_histology_image_using_text_tool(
image_path=img_path,
classes=classes,
device='cuda:0',
apply_softmax=True,
prompts=None
)
print(f"Image: {img_path}", result)
results.append(result)
------------------------------------ Step 3 ------------------------------------
import re
# Parse similarity scores and sum probabilities for each class
class_probs = {cls: 0.0 for cls in classes}
for result in results:
for score_str in result['similarity_scores']:
cls, prob = score_str.split(':')
cls = cls.strip()
prob = float(prob.strip())
class_probs[cls] += prob
print(class_probs)
# Select the class with the highest summed probability
diagnosis = max(class_probs, key=class_probs.get)
patient_id = Path(patient_folder).name
output = [{"patient_id": patient_id, "diagnosis": diagnosis}]
(c) Results and ground truth
Tool output:
invasive lobular: 0.007
invasive ductal: 1.981
metaplastic: 1.012
Agent result: invasive ductal
Ground Truth: metaplastic
Figure L.1: Question 2 from PatchQA: A failure case as Nova relies on the output of tool
score single histology image using text tool, which incorrectly predicts that a ma-
jority of images are of type invasive ductal breast cancer and only correctly predicts
metaplastic breast cancer for one out of three images.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
NOVA: An Agentic Framework for Automated Histopathology Analysis and Discovery
(a) Question
For histology WSI at /.../tcga_brca_to_use/WSI_flat/TCGA-A2-A0CM-01Z-00-DX1.AC4901DE-4B6D-4185-BB9F
-156033839828.svs, compute the convexity of each tissue region, then return the average convexity per slide.
Work in pixel space! Additional instructions: ...
(b) Code (partial)
------------------------------------ Step 5 ------------------------------------
# Extract exterior coordinates as a list of [x, y] points
polygon = tissues_gdf.geometry.iloc[0]
contour_points = list(polygon.exterior.coords)
print(contour_points)
# Compute area
area_result = get_contour_area(contour=contour_points)
print('Area:', area_result)
# Compute convex hull
hull_result = get_contour_convex_hull(contour=contour_points)
convex_hull = hull_result['contour_convex_hull']
print('Convex hull:', convex_hull)
# Compute convex hull area
hull_area_result = get_contour_area(contour=convex_hull)
print('Convex hull area:', hull_area_result)
(c) Execution logs
[...]
Area: {'contour_area': 3084211442.668519}
Convex hull: [...]
Convex hull area: {'contour_area': 3603253238.057195}
(d) Code (partial)
------------------------------------ Step 6 ------------------------------------
import json
slide_id = 'TCGA-A2-A0CM-01Z-00-DX1.AC4901DE-4B6D-4185-BB9F-156033839828'
area = 3084211442.668519
hull_area = 3603253238.057195
convexity = area / hull_area
avg_convexity = round(convexity, 3)
result = [{"slide_id": slide_id, "avg_convexity": avg_convexity}]
(e) Results and ground truth
Agent result: 0.856
Ground Truth: 1.196
Figure L.2: Question 24 from DataQA: Failure case as the agent incorrectly recomputes convexity,
a value already available through one of the used tools.
34
