
===== PAGE 1 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
1
From Perception to Cognition: A Survey of
Vision-Language Interactive Reasoning in
Multimodal Large Language Models
Chenyue Zhou, Mingxuan Wang, Yanbiao Ma*, Chenxu Wu, Wanyi Chen, Zhe Qian, Xinyu Liu, Yiwei Zhang,
Junhao Wang, Hengbo Xu, Fei Luo, Tianyi Jiang, Xiaohua Chen, Xiaoshuai Hao, Hehan Li, Andi Zhang,
Wenxuan Wang, Kaiyan Zhang, Guoli Jia, Lingling Li, Senior Member, IEEE,
Zhiwu Lu, Senior Member, IEEE, Yang Lu*, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yike Guo, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) strive to achieve a profound, human-like understanding of and interaction with
the physical world, but often exhibit a shallow and incoherent integration when acquiring information (Perception) and conducting
reasoning (Cognition). This disconnect leads to a spectrum of reasoning failures, with hallucination being the most prominent. Collectively,
these issues expose a fundamental challenge: the ability to process pixels does not yet confer the ability to construct a coherent, credible
internal world model. To systematically dissect and address this challenge, this survey introduces a novel and unified analytical
framework: “From Perception to Cognition.” We deconstruct the complex process of vision-language interactive understanding into two
interdependent layers: Perception, the foundational ability to accurately extract visual information and achieve fine-grained alignment with
textual instructions; and Cognition, the higher-order capability for proactive, multi-step, goal-oriented reasoning built upon this perceptual
foundation, the core of which is the formation of a dynamic observe-think-verify reasoning loop. Guided by this framework, this paper
systematically analyzes the key bottlenecks of current MLLMs at both layers. It surveys the landscape of cutting-edge methods designed
to address these challenges, spanning from techniques that enhance low-level visual representations to those that improve high-level
reasoning paradigms. Furthermore, we review critical benchmarks and delineate future research directions. This survey aims to provide
the research community with a clear, structured perspective for understanding the intrinsic limitations of current MLLMs and to illuminate
the path toward building next-generation models capable of deep reasoning and a genuine understanding of the world.
Index Terms—Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), Interactive Vision-Language Reasoning, Perception and Cognition
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
T
HE rapid advancement of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) is propelling the field of artificial in-
telligence toward its long-standing goal of Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) [1], [2], [3], [4]: creating agents that can
perceive, reason, and interact with the physical world in a
human-like manner [5], [6], [7], [8]. Central to this progress
is the profound synthesis of the sophisticated symbolic
reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) [9],
[10] with the potent perceptual acuity of Computer Vision
(CV) foundation models [11], [12]. On one hand, LLMs
such as the GPT series [13], have acquired extensive world
knowledge and formidable logical reasoning skills through
pre-training on vast text corpora. However, they are inher-
ently confined to a purely symbolic space, operating as
“blind” reasoners, detached from the sensory richness of
the physical world. Conversely, vision foundation models
like CLIP [11] have successfully mapped visual and linguistic
•
Yanbiao Ma is with the Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin
University of China.
E-mail: ybma1998@ruc.edu.cn
•
Yang Lu is with Xiamen University, China.
•
Yike Guo is with The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Hong Kong SAR, China.
•
Chenyue Zhou is with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Manuscript received September 28, 2025.
modalities into a unified embedding space [14], [15], enabling
unprecedented perceptual generalization. Yet, they typically
lack the deep cognitive faculties required for complex, multi-
step reasoning.
The emergence of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs) marked the initial exploration into integrating
these two capabilities. In this early Exploration Phase
(How to Connect?), exemplified by pioneering works such
as Flamingo [16] and LLaVA [17], the central challenge
was a technical one: how to effectively connect a vision
encoder to an LLM. At the time, the research community
was primarily focused on solving foundational engineering
problems like architectural design and feature alignment,
with the primary objective being to make the connection
viable. Once the connection was successfully established, and
despite progress on numerous benchmarks, the brittleness
of these models became exposed when confronted with
scenarios demanding fine-grained perception and complex
reasoning. This is specifically manifested in the prevalence
of issues such as hallucination and bias in state-of-the-art
models [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], including Qwen2.5-VL [23],
InternVL 2.5 [24], and GPT-4o [25]. These models frequently
misinterpret visual details (a perceptual deficit) and are
unable to maintain coherent logical chains (a cognitive
deficit) [15], [26]. Consequently, the research focus has shifted
toward a systematic developmental path from Perception to
arXiv:2509.25373v4  [cs.AI]  16 Oct 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
2
ChatSpot
2021
2023
2024
3
6
9
2025
3
9
CLIP
MATCHA
Flamingo
BLIP2
VPGTrans
VisionLLM 
Shikra 
LISA
Q-Instruct
LLaVA-Grounding
PixelLM
Prompt Highlighter
OMG-seg
Mini-Gemini
ChartGemma
MoME
Intern VL-2.5
VITRON
MoVA
Ovis
OMG-LLaVA
VisionLLMV2 
Qwen 2.5-VL
POPEN
DyFo
ToVE
Perception
DinoV2
EVA-CLIP
Meta-CLIP
GLaMM
SPHINX
ViP-LLaVA
GSVA
Ospery
AM-RADIO
InstructBLIP
RT2
Kosmos-2
LLaVA-Med
Draw-and-Understand
Ferret-V2
Eyes Wide Shut
InternGPT
Multimodal-CoT
Visual-ChatGPT
TACO
LLaVA-Plus
PerceptionGPT
CLOVA
Chain-of-Spot
Visual-CoT
2023
2024
2025
Visual Sketchpad
LLaVA-CoT
GPT-o1
1
3
5
GPT-o3
LlamaV-o1
GCOT
CoT-VLA
Visual-RFT
DWIM
Seg-Zero
MM-GCOT
7
Deepeyes
Chain-of-Focus
VLM-R3
Don’t look only once
VTool-R1
Point-RFT
Socratic-MCTS
Vrest
MINT-CoT
Active O3
VoCoT
VRAG-RL
Argus
ViCrit
VGR
Look-back
PixelThink
Cognition
VLM-R1
VisuoThink
Fig. 1. Evolution of representative multimodal large language models from 2021 to 2025 organized along Perception and Cognition.
Cognition. In particular, the approach of first establishing
a precise Perception layer as a prerequisite for building
advanced Cognition has gradually become a consensus for
enhancing the capabilities of MLLMs [15], [27].
To systematically chart this evolutionary trajectory, this
survey introduces the “From Perception to Cognition”
framework as a unified lens for analysis. It deconstructs
the complex process of vision-language interactive reasoning
into two distinct yet interconnected layers. The first, Percep-
tion, represents the foundational ability to accurately extract
visual information and establish fine-grained alignment
with textual instructions. This requires not only recognizing
objects, attributes, and relations but also precisely ground-
ing textual concepts to specific visual details. The second,
Cognition, is the higher-order capability for proactive, goal-
oriented, multi-step reasoning built upon this perceptual
foundation. It involves decomposing complex problems,
planning logical steps, and, critically, the ability to dy-
namically re-examine visual evidence to validate or refine
its reasoning path, thus forming an “observe-think-verify”
feedback loop. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we present the timeline
of MLLM development from 2021 to 2025, organized along
these two central pillars of Perception and Cognition.
Leveraging this framework, this survey provides a
structured and comprehensive review of the key problems,
methodologies, benchmarks, and future directions in in-
teractive vision-language reasoning. Our review begins by
analyzing the core challenges at the perceptual and cognitive
levels that have driven the field’s progress. Subsequently,
we survey the cutting-edge methods aimed at enhancing
Perception (e.g., advanced visual encoders) and those de-
signed to bolster Cognition (e.g., sophisticated Chain-of-
Thought paradigms and dynamic reasoning mechanisms).
By adopting this “perception-to-cognition” perspective, we
aim to elucidate the limitations of existing models and chart
a developmental path for technological evolution.
1.1
Pipeline of the Survey
This survey presents a comprehensive overview of the key
problems, methodologies, benchmarks, and future directions
in interactive vision-language reasoning within Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs). As illustrated in Fig. 2,
our discussion is structured as follows:
Sec. 2 outlines the fundamental issues in vision-language
interaction. We first establish our core analytical framework
by defining perception (Sec. 2.1) and cognition (Sec. 2.2). We
then use this framework to analyze the primary challenges
that MLLMs face along these two dimensions (Sec. 2.3).
Sec. 3 reviews the evolution of relevant methods, orga-
nized according to the challenges they address within our
perception-cognition framework. To solve perception-level
problems, we explore techniques focused on enhancing fine-
grained visual capabilities (Sec. 3.1) and improving vision-
language alignment (Sec. 3.2). To address cognitive-level
challenges, we delve into methods for enhancing problem
decomposition (Sec. 3.3) and mitigating hallucinations by
enabling dynamic reasoning that overcomes the limitations
of static perceptual memory (Sec. 3.4).

===== PAGE 3 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
3
Applications and Benchmarks
Scientific Problem 
Solving
Medical Diagnosis
Diagram 
Understanding
Video Understanding
Sentiment Analysis
Future directions
Cross-Image Relation 
Reasoning
Generative Reasoning
Real-World Cognitive 
Evaluation
Latent Reasoning
Tool-Augmented 
Reasoning
Problems and 
Challenges 
Introduction
From Perception to Cognition: 
A Survey of Vision-Language 
Interactive Reasoning in 
Multimodal Large Language 
Models
Perception
Cognition
Perception Enhancement
Enhance Low-Level Visual Perception
Enhancing the representational 
capacity of individual visual 
encoders 
Integrating multiple 
encoders
Task-relevant visual 
representations extraction
Enhance Visual-Language Alignment
Cross-modal fusion and 
response generation
Dynamic visual perception
Cognition Enhancement
Enhance Problem decomposition ability
Mitigate Hallucinations in reasoning
Enhancing problem 
decomposition via training
Automated synthesis of 
training data
Vision-language alignment via 
endogenous visual evidence 
Injection
Vision-language 
alignment via exogenous 
visual evidence Injection
Inference-time search for flexible decomposition
Methods
Introduction to the problems
Perception of MLLMs
Cognition of MLLMs
Coarse-grained alignment 
at the perception level
Limited “rethinking” 
capability at the 
cognition level
Pipeline of the Survey
Contribution of the 
Survey
Challenges
Fig. 2. The overview of the survey structure.
Sec. 4 provides a thorough analysis of key benchmarks
and applications across diverse domains, including scientific
problem-solving, medical diagnosis, diagram understanding,
and video reasoning. This section evaluates how current
models perform on tasks that require different balances of
perceptual and cognitive skills.
Sec. 5 concludes the survey by discussing promising
future research avenues. We explore emerging paradigms
such as latent space reasoning, generative reasoning, and tool-
augmented reasoning, highlighting how they might further
bridge the gap between perception and cognition.
1.2
Contribution of the Survey
Recent years have witnessed a surge in survey papers on Mul-
timodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), each providing
a unique perspective on this rapidly evolving field. Among
the first, Yin et al. [28] offered a foundational overview of
MLLM development up to early 2024. Subsequent work
began to specialize. Some surveys delved into the crucial
area of reasoning, analyzing methods for enhancing step-
by-step “slow thinking” processes [29], [30]. More recently,
a number of surveys [31], [32], [33] has converged on the
theme of “thinking with images,” systematically analyzing
advancements in fine-grained visual reasoning.
While these surveys provide invaluable insights, they
tend to focus either on general MLLM architectures or on
specific facets of high-level reasoning. Our survey is distinct
from prior work by adopting a more foundational perspec-
tive that deconstructs interactive reasoning into two core,
interconnected components: perception and cognition. Based
on this approach, we make the following key contributions:
• A
Novel
Analytical
Framework:
We
introduce
a
“Perception-Cognition” framework that provides a struc-
tured lens to understand the fundamental challenges
in vision-language interaction. This framework moves
beyond a surface-level categorization of tasks or models
to dissect the root causes of model failures, such as
hallucination, by mapping them to specific deficiencies
at either the perceptual or cognitive level.
• A Structured Taxonomy of Methodologies: Based on
this framework, we provide a systematic and coherent
taxonomy of existing methods. We demonstrate how seem-
ingly disparate research efforts (such as enhancing visual
encoders and developing advanced Chain-of-Thought) are,
in fact, targeted efforts to solve distinct problems along
the perception-to-cognition continuum. This clarifies the
relationships between different lines of research.
• A Unified Perspective on the MLLM Developmental
Path: By structuring our analysis along the Perception-
to-Cognition axis, this survey explicitly highlights the
fundamental dependency of high-level reasoning on the
quality of low-level visual representation. It reframes these
two domains not as isolated research areas, but as integral
and sequential stages in the development of MLLMs. This
unified view offers a holistic roadmap, illustrating that

===== PAGE 4 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
4
Observe
① First, locate the table
② Find the cup on the table
①
②
Multimodal 
LLM
Semantic
Representations
Cross-Modal
Alignment
Perception
…
What color 
is the drink?
Visual
Representation
Textual
Representation
Cognition
Reasoning
Verify
Fig. 3. Overview of the perception–cognition loop. Perceptual modules
extract semantic and spatial evidence which are aligned by a multimodal
LLM. Cognition then executes a plan–observe–reason cycle with iterative
verification to ground each step in visual evidence.
advancements in Perception are a necessary foundation for
achieving breakthroughs in Cognition.
2
PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES
Before we deeply explore the classification of methods
for vision-language interactive Reasoning in Multimodal
large language models (MLLMs), we need to define a core
concept to clarify the scope of a model’s capabilities in
vision-language interactive understanding: What are the
perception and cognition of MLLMs ? As depicted in Fig. 3,
we summarize the relationship between perception and
cognition.
2.1
Perception of MLLMs
Perception primarily refers to the ability of multimodal large
models to accurately extract relevant visual information
from input images when tackling specific visual tasks, and
to further encode this raw visual data into semantically
meaningful visual representations [34], [35], [11]. This pro-
cess involves not only recognizing visual features such
as objects, backgrounds, and texts [36], [37], [38] within
images, but also discerning spatial relationships between
objects, contextual associations [39], [40] and deep mining
of latent semantic information [41]. More critically, effec-
tive perception demands that models align these encoded
visual representations with input textual information, such
as question descriptions, instruction prompts, or dialogue
content. This ensures semantic correspondence and mutual
reinforcement between visual and textual data. Through
such alignment mechanisms, models can provide clear,
reliable visual evidence during subsequent vision-language
interactions—validating reasoning accuracy or serving as
direct answer substantiation. In short, perception constitutes
the foundational capability for models to “see” and
“understand” visual information, laying the groundwork
for subsequent higher-level cognitive operations.
2.2
Cognition of MLLMs
Compared with perception, which emphasizes information
extraction and alignment, cognition focuses more on a
model’s proactive decision-making and reasoning capabili-
ties driven by visual tasks. Specifically, cognition manifests
as a model’s ability to systematically determine when to
examine visual information and which specific image regions
to focus on based on current task requirements. This selective
attention is not random behavior but rather decisions made
by the model by integrating existing reasoning processes
with visual textual evidence. After acquiring relevant visual
information, the model integrates existing textual and visual
data to perform further reasoning. Crucially, cognition also
requires the model to dynamically assess the sufficiency
of current information at each reasoning step: if existing
evidence proves insufficient to support conclusions, the
model proactively supplements additional visual evidence
(e.g., refocusing on relevant image regions to capture finer
features); conversely, if current information adequately sup-
ports the inference, it directly generates the final answer. This
process forms a closed-loop cycle of “observation” (acquiring
visual information), “thinking” (multimodal reasoning), and
“verification” (validating the match between reasoning results
and evidence). This ensures the model’s cognitive process
not only maintains logical consistency but also dynamically
adjusts its review strategy based on task difficulty, enabling
handling of complex vision-language interaction tasks.
2.3
Challenges
Building on a clear understanding and distinction of percep-
tion and cognition in MLLMs, this section will, within this
framework, elaborate on the challenges that MLLMs face in
vision-language reasoning. Despite significant advancements
in MLLMs for vision-language understanding, where they
achieve near-human or even superior performance in tasks
like image captioning and visual question answering—a
series of critical issues remain unresolved in practical appli-
cations. These challenges impose heightened demands on
both perception and cognition. We group these challenges
into two primary categories, corresponding to the domains
of perception (Sec. 2.3.1) and cognition (Sec. 2.3.2).
2.3.1
Barriers to Accurate Perception: Weak Extraction and
Coarse Alignment
• Weak Low-Level Visual Information Extraction Capa-
bility: The fundamental limitation of early mainstream
MLLM models, such as the LLaVA [17] [42] series, stems
from the shortcomings of their underlying CLIP-ViT visual
encoders. CLIP-ViT’s pretraining objective focuses on global
vision-language alignment, learning matches between the
visual semantics of entire images and entire text rather than
precise regional or pixel-level alignment. This alignment
approach leads to poor fine-grained information recognition
and weak spatial localization capabilities. Beyond perceptual
limitations, CLIP [11] also suffers from specific data gener-
alization issues. The absence of structured, symbolic visual
information (e.g., mathematical geometry problems, charts)
in its pretraining dataset causes suboptimal performance in
scenarios requiring symbolic or structured understanding.
• Limited Interaction between Visual and Textual Informa-
tion: Most existing MLLMs first encode images indepen-
dently before projecting them uniformly into the decoder.
Cross-modal interaction primarily relies on global relevance
alignment, failing to map language queries to specific regions
or pixels. Consequently, the coupled information between
text and vision is underutilized.

===== PAGE 5 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
5
2.3.2
Limited Rethinking Capability Constrains Reasoning
• Challenges in Decomposing Complex Vision-Language
Interaction Tasks: Lacking executable task decomposition
paradigms, existing methods predominantly employ single-
step or fixed-template approaches, supervising only outcome
correctness during training rather than process correctness
and consistency.
• One-Shot Evidence-Based Memory-Based Reasoning Leads
to Forgetting and Hallucinations: A fundamental limitation
of most MLLMs is their static, single-pass approach to visual
processing during inference. They perform a single encoding
of the image at the input stage and do not revisit it during
the subsequent reasoning and text generation process. This
lack of a dynamic perception-reasoning loop, where visual
evidence can be re-examined as needed, often causes a
decoupling between the final answer and the underlying
visual facts. This issue is particularly exacerbated in complex,
long-chain tasks that require understanding the spatial
and semantic relationships among multiple visual elements.
Consequently, enabling more robust reasoning requires a
dynamic mechanism capable of strategically deciding when
to re-examine the image for evidence, where to focus
attention, and what specific information to extract at each
step of the reasoning process.
In summary, by systematically deconstructing the com-
plex challenges of MLLMs into bottlenecks at the perceptual
level and reasoning limitations at the cognitive level, we not
only gain a clearer diagnosis of the root causes behind model
failures like hallucination but also reveal the underlying
logic of the field’s technological evolution. It is precisely
these specific challenges that constitute the primary driving
force behind advancements in MLLMs, spurring a vast body
of work aimed at either bolstering perception or deepening
cognition. In the following section, guided by this framework,
we will systematically review and analyze the cutting-edge
methodologies that the research community has proposed to
overcome these distinct perceptual and cognitive challenges.
3
METHODS: A SURVEY
In the previous chapter, we systematically analyzed the chal-
lenges in MLLMs’ vision-language interaction understanding
based on the dimensions of perception and cognition. This
chapter will dive into research approaches based on the
issues raised in the previous Sec. 3.1 and Sec. 3.2 focusing
on addressing perception-related problems, corresponding
to the subproblems proposed in Sec. 2.3.1. Sec. 3.3 and
Sec. 3.4 concentrate on solving cognition-related problems,
corresponding to the subproblems proposed in Sec. 2.3.2.
3.1
Enhance the Low-Level Visual Perception of MLLMs
To address the common limitation of weak capacity in low-
level visual information extraction, a large number of recent
works have concentrated on advancing visual encoders
themselves, with the goal of fundamentally improving the
representation of fine-grained visual details. We summarize
the related methods in Table 1. This line of progress has
evolved along two main directions: enhancing the repre-
sentational capacity of individual visual encoders and
integrating multiple encoders in a complementary manner.
• Enhance the Representational Capacity of Individual
Vision Encoders. To address the insufficient representation
of detail in early encoders like CLIP
[11], subsequent
research on visual foundation models has focused on two
main areas: improving fine-grained representation and
geometric-texture representation. On one hand, to enhance
fine-grained representation, subsequent visual encoders such
as MetaCLIP [45], SigLip [44], and Eva-CLIP [43] improved
semantic alignment and fine-grained recognition abilities by
optimizing training objectives and constructing high-quality
datasets. On the other hand, to improve geometric-texture
representation, several works like DINO series [65], [46], [12]
proposed a self-supervised training approach to explore the
intrinsic properties of visual data. This enabled them to
generate visual representations rich in pixel-level geometric
information and texture details, leading to strong perfor-
mance on tasks requiring sophisticated structural awareness,
such as segmentation, localization, and depth estimation.
Furthermore, DIVA [47] and VLV [48] unify image generation
and understanding by distilling the superior fine-grained
representations from generative models into the CLIP-based
visual encoder, thereby bridging the gap between generative
and discriminative visual understanding.
• Multi-Encoder Integration and Distillation. Given that
foundational encoders like CLIP [11] excel at high-level se-
mantic representation but lack fine-grained geometric detail ,
and newer models like DINOv2 [46] provide rich structural
and pixel-level representations, research naturally progressed
towards combining their complementary strengths. Early
explorations like Eyes Wide Out [27], Prismatic VLMs [49],
FerretV2 [50], SPHINX [53], MouSi [51], BRAVE [52] pro-
posed a static fusion of features from both CLIP and DINOv2.
LLaVA-HR [66] introduces a hybrid-resolution adapter to
inject high-resolution features into a low-resolution visual
encoder. Mini-Gemini [67] employs CLIP-generated tokens as
low-resolution queries, which cross-attend to features from a
separate high-resolution encoder within localized windows
at corresponding spatial positions. ParGo [54] maps the
visual features into Partial tokens, which interact only with a
subset of visual features, and Global tokens, which interact
with all visual features, thereby enabling effective capture
of both local and global information in the image. Recent
studies [55] have shown through extensive experiments that
directly fusing multi-layer visual features at the input stage
achieves more stable and effective performance.
Such fusion mechanisms improve model performance on
fine-grained recognition, small object perception, and precise
spatial localization—tasks that demand rich and multi-scale
visual understanding. However, these approaches rely on
static feature integration, which simply stitches together
visual representations from different “expert” encoders
without adaptive modulation. This rigid combination may
lead to conflicting feature requirements across diverse tasks,
limiting the model’s flexibility and contextual adaptability in
complex vision-language scenarios.
To address this, more advanced methods such as
MoME [56], MoVA [57], VisionWeaver [58], TOVE [59],
R2-T2 [60] introduced Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [68] archi-
tectures. These models dynamically weight and combine
fine-grained and geometric features from different experts
based on task requirements, mitigating feature conflicts.

===== PAGE 6 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
6
TABLE 1
Representative vision backbone models and their enhanced low-level visual representations.
Research Direction
Method
Venue
Main Contribution
Single-encoder
enhancement
a. Single-encoder optimization.
EVA-CLIP [43]
arXiv’23
proposing training methods to enhance the efficiency and stability of CLIP
in large-scale settings
SigLip [44]
CVPR’23
Leveraging a sigmoid loss for enhancing fine-grained representation.
MetaCLIP [45]
ICLR’24
Enhancing fine-grained representation by training in larger-scale, high-
quality datasets.
DINOv2 [46]
TMLR’25
Strengthening geometric and structural representation through self-
supervised learning.
DIVA [47]
ICLR’25
By conditioning the diffusion model on dense visual features from CLIP
and applying reconstruction loss to optimize CLIP.
VLV [48]
arXiv’25
Improving CLIP through a unified architecture for image understanding
and generation.
Multi-encoder
Integration
b. Static fusion of encoders.
Eyes Wide Shut [27]
CVPR’24
Directly concatenating the visual tokens from CLIP and DINOv2 in an
alternating, interleaved manner to form a longer sequence.
Prismatic VLMs [49]
ICML’24
Concatenating the visual tokens from CLIP and DINOv2 along the channel
dimension without increasing the sequence length.
Ferret-v2 [50]
CoLM’24
Employing multi-granularity fusion of visual representations for fine-
grained perception.
MouSi [51]
CoLM’24
Integrating multi-scale encoder outputs, combining global context with
local structural cues for robust spatial reasoning.
BRAVE [52]
ECCV’24
Statically fusing visual features by adopting resolution-aware projection
to preserve both high-resolution local detail and low-resolution global
semantics.
SPHINX [53]
ECCV’24
Leveraging hierarchical fusion of CLIP and DINO to balance semantic
alignment and geometric precision.
ParGo [54]
AAAI’25
Introducing local and global tokens with dedicated attention masks to
extract both fine-grained and holistic visual information.
Layer Select Fuse [55]
CVPR’25
Directly fusing multi-layer visual features at the input stage proves to be
more stable and effective.
c. MoE-based multi-encoder fusion.
MoME [56]
NeurIPS’24
Task-adaptively fusing CLIP and DINOv2 features via a Mixture-of-
Experts.
MoVA [57]
NeurIPS’24
Enhancing cross-task representation flexibility using a multi-expert MoE.
VisionWeaver [58]
EMNLP’25
Dynamically combining SAM, Vary (specialized in text recognition) and
DINOv2 through a routing module.
TOVE [59]
ICLR’25
Feature combination is achieved through coarse-grained context-aware
expert routing and a fine-grained expert fusion module.
R2-T2 [60]
ICML’25
Locally optimizing the routing weights at test time by steering them toward
those of correctly predicted samples in the neighborhood.
d. Distillation-based models.
Radio [61]
CVPR’24
Enabling a single encoder to absorb heterogeneous vision encoders
capabilities via multi-teacher feature distillation.
UNIC [62]
ECCV’24
Enabling a universal classifier to inherit cross-task skills from multiple
teachers encoders via multi-teacher, layer-wise distillation.
MoVE-KD [63]
CVPR’25
Enabling a single encoder to inherit the distinct abilities of multiple experts
via distillation.
DUNE [64]
CVPR’25
Compressing multi-expert knowledge into an efficient and powerful
lightweight model.
While effective, using multiple encoders drastically increases
computational costs. As a solution, works such as MoVE-
KD [63], Radio [61], UNIC [62] and Dune [64] have employed
knowledge distillation. This approach transfers the combined
strengths of multiple expert “teachers” into a single, effi-
cient “student” encoder. The resulting student model can
generate a unified representation that effectively captures
both fine-grained details and geometric structure, achieving
performance comparable to multi-encoder models but at a
significantly lower computational cost.
3.2
Enhance Vision-Language Alignment in MLLMs
While prior work has significantly improved the general-
purpose representation capabilities of visual encoders, a new
core focus has emerged in the field of MLLMs: enhancing
task-driven vision-language alignment for better interac-
tive understanding. The core concept of this alignment is to
effectively connect task-agnostic, general visual semantics,
encompassing broad information about objects, attributes,
and relations, with the specific goals and constraints con-
tained in a user’s instruction. This instruction-guided work-
flow transforms general-purpose visual representations into
task-relevant ones through two primary stages:
• Task-Relevant Visual Representations Extraction. Con-
ditioned on the instruction’s semantics, the model se-
lectively extracts relevant representations from the high-
dimensional, general-purpose visual representation space
(Sec. 3.2.1).
• Cross-Modal Fusion and Response Generation. The ex-
tracted visual representations are then deeply fused with
the instruction’s semantic representation to generate a pre-

===== PAGE 7 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
7
TABLE 2
Representative methods grouped by research directions. We keep ultra-brief contributions for compactness.
Research Direction
Method
Venue
Main Contribution
Task-Relevant Visual
Representations Extraction
(a) Improve the projection layer.
Honeybee [69]
CVPR’24
Proposing a flexible and locality-preserving visual projector that balances
efficiency with spatial understanding.
Uni–Med [70]
NeurIPS’24 Proposing a CMoE module to manage inter-task relationships via dynamic
resource allocation.
ChartMoE [71]
ICLR’25
Proposing a MOE projector for aligning textual and graphical elements in
different charts.
LLaVA–ST [72]
CVPR’25
Proposing a post-processing module that compresses projected video
embeddings while preserving their spatio-temporal relationships.
LLaVA–Octopus [73]
arXiv’25
Proposing an instruction-driven adaptive Projector.
Ovis2.5 [74]
arXiv’25
Proposing a visual embedding table to replace the MLP projection network.
(b) Task-specific fine-tuning.
MATCHA [75]
ACL’23
Math–centric SFT
LLaVA–Med [76]
NeurIPS’23 Medical SFT
Q–Instruct [77]
CVPR’24
Low-level perception SFT
ChartInstruct [78]
ACL’24
Chart SFT
(c) Prompt-tuning.
VPT [79]
ECCV’22
Proposing visual prompts for adapting downstream visual tasks
VPGTrans [80]
NeurIPS’23 Proposing transferable visual prompts generator across MLLMs
TVP [81]
CVPR’24
Proposing joint learnable visual and text prompts for coordinated task
adaptation
Cross-Modal Fusion
and Response Generation
(d) Improve instruction encoding paradigm.
Shikra [82]
arXiv’23
Encoding coordinates in text instruction.
LLaVA–Grounding [83]
ECCV’24
Encoding boxes and masks in prompts, unifying visual chat with detection
Kosmos–2 [84]
ICLR’24
Integrating ground tokens into vocabulary, allowing the model to generate
bounding boxes as its instruction-driven output.
GLaMM [85]
CVPR’24
Introducing mask token to vocabulary, enabling the model to predict the
pixel-level mask
ViP–LLaVA [86]
CVPR’24
Encoding visual instruction prompts via visual feature fusion
Draw–and–Understand [87] ICLR’25
Proposing a visual instruction prompt encoder
(e) Enhance output architecture.
LISA [88]
CVPR’24
Introducing<SEG> token to generate decoder-based segmentation outputs
GSVA [89]
CVPR’24
Introducing <SEG> token for multi-targets mask and <REJ> token to reject
empty targets
VisionLLM v2 [90]
NeurIPS’24 Introducing unified multi–task decoders
VITRON [91]
NeurIPS’24 Proposing an unified paradigm for video and image segmentation.
M2SA [92]
ICLR’25
Proposing early visual feature fusion and multiple <SEG> tokens to
generate more fine-grained output
POPEN [93]
CVPR’25
Proposing preference-based segmention
Dynamic
Perception
(d) Visual search.
V* [94]
CVPR’24
Iterative look–back search
DyFo [95]
CVPR’25
MCTS–guided focus
FaST [96]
ICLR’25
Fast or slow visual search
cise, structured output that meets the task’s requirements
(Sec. 3.2.2).
However, the methods in these stages represent a static,
single-turn form of interaction. To address this limitation, a
key research direction has been to build a dynamic perception
mechanism (Sec. 3.2.3). The goal is to give the model the
ability for active perception. Specifically, the model can
evaluate its current understanding to determine if more
visual evidence is needed, and then actively re-examine the
image to get that evidence. This creates an iterative visual
search loop.
3.2.1
Task-Relevant Visual Representation Extraction
Following the aforementioned framework, we first explore
the core strategies for the first stage: enhancing the model’s
ability to extract task-relevant visual representations. Re-
searchers have primarily proposed three main approaches:
improving the projection layer, task-specific fine-tuning,
and prompt tuning. These methods focus on strengthening
the expression of task-specific visual features by optimizing
Fig. 4. Left: Connector-based MLLM: The typical architecture of traditional
multimodal models (e.g., LLaVA), where the connector is usually an MLP
that projects visual features into the same dimensional space as text
embeddings. Right: Structured embedding alignment in Ovis: The output
of the visual encoder is no longer directly projected through an MLP, but
is instead mapped to a visual embedding table.
the alignment and adaptation mechanism that maps visual
features into the language space, all without altering the
underlying visual backbone. As illustrated in Table 2, we
categorize the representative works in task-relevant visual
representation extraction.
• Improve the Projection Layer. As the bridge connecting

===== PAGE 8 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
8
the visual encoder and the large language model, the design
quality of the projection layer directly determines the depth
and precision of the model’s visual understanding. Tradi-
tional static projection methods, such as a simple MLP [97],
indiscriminately map all visual features, creating a significant
information bottleneck [16], [98], [99]. Therefore, the core
significance of improving the projection layer lies not only in
transmitting richer visual information but, more importantly,
in empowering it with the ability to dynamically extract and
transform relevant visual features based on the specific task.
For instance, in the fields of chart understanding and med-
ical question answering, ChartMoE [71] and Uni-Med [70]
employ a MOE [68] architecture. This structure consists
of multiple identical two-layer MLPs and uses a Top-k
routing mechanism to weight and combine their outputs
based on the input content. In video understanding, LLaVA-
Octopus [73] adaptively fuses the outputs of multiple special-
ized projectors according to the given instruction. To enhance
the model’s fine-grained perception of spatial relationships,
LLaVA-ST [72] and Honeybee [69] respectively reinforce
the spatial properties of visual features before projection by
explicitly modeling local relationships and introducing space-
aware convolutions. This is crucial for localization and refer-
ring tasks. ParGo [54] proposes an innovative global-local
projector that bridges vision and language by integrating
both global context and local details, overcoming the over-
focus on salient regions in traditional methods, enabling
more comprehensive and fine-grained visual representation,
while effectively controlling computational cost through
token length management, thus achieving efficient alignment
between visual features and the LLM. As shown in Fig.4, the
Ovis series [74], [100] no longer projects the output of the
visual encoder through an MLP, but instead maps it into a
learnable visual embedding table for transformation. This
structure is similar to the text embedding table.
• Task-Specific Fine-Tuning. Instruction fine-tuning on task-
specific vision-language datasets, such as LLaVA-Instruct-
150K [17] and MathV360K [101], can enhance a model’s abil-
ity to extract visual information tailored to those tasks. For
example, MATCHA [75] focuses on mathematical reasoning;
Q-Instruct [77] is dedicated to strengthening foundational
visual perception for question answering; ChartGemma [102]
and ChartInstruct [78] concentrate on the comprehension of
chart-based problems; and LLaVA-Med [76] targets visual
question answering in the medical domain.
• Prompt Tuning. Although instruction fine-tuning is effec-
tive, it has limited scalability and typically requires adjusting
a large number of parameters, resulting in high training
costs. To address this issue, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) techniques have been introduced to the multimodal
domain. The core idea originates from Visual Prompt Tuning
(VPT) [79] in the computer vision field. This method adds
a small number of learnable prompt parameters to the
input of a frozen backbone network, enabling adaptation
to downstream tasks at a very low cost. Inspired by this,
works such as VPGTrans [80]and TVP [81] have designed
visual prompts. Without compromising the model’s general-
purpose visual representations, these prompts enhance
the alignment between task-specific semantics and visual
features, thereby achieving efficient and transferable task
adaptation.
Large Language Model
User Query: What do 
you see in the image? 
Please locate and 
segment it.
Vision 
Encoder
Tokenizer
Prompt 
Encoder
Visual prompts
Answer: I can 
see a cat.
Decoder
<seg>
Text output
Grounding and Segmentation
Fig. 5. An illustration of cross modal fusion and response generation.
In this figure, the prompt encoder improves the instruction encoding
paradigm. The segmentation decoder enables the model output the
segmentation mask, which enhances the response generation.
3.2.2
Cross-Modal Fusion and Response Generation
Once task-relevant visual representations are obtained, the
subsequent challenge is to effectively align these repre-
sentations with the semantics of the instruction to drive
the generation of precise responses. In mainstream MLLM
architectures, this cross-modal alignment process primarily
relies on cross-attention mechanisms. Consequently, most
current research is evolving along two parallel technical
paths: The first path focuses on improving the instruction
encoding paradigm, enabling the model to respond more
precisely to specific semantic concepts within the instruction
during the alignment process [83]. The second path, by
enhancing the output architecture, aims to materialize
the cross-modal understanding formed during fusion into
responses that go beyond the scope of text [103]. These
two paths are complementary, sharing the common goal of
achieving more fine-grained vision-language alignment. As
depicted in Fig. 5, we demonstrate the process of how to
enhance the encode paradigm and response generation.
• Improve Instruction Encoding Paradigm. To enhance the
region-level referring capabilities of MLLMs, the instruction
encoding paradigm has undergone a series of developments.
Early models, such as Shikra [82] and ChatSpot [115], directly
encoded the continuous coordinates of a Region of Interest
(ROI) as part of the text sequence. To facilitate model learning,
Kosmos-2 [84] first encodes the image after dividing it into
p × p patches, and then discretizes and normalizes the
continuous ROI coordinates, mapping them to positional
tokens within the vocabulary. Subsequent research, including
GLaMM [85] and Osprey [116], adopted binary masks as
input, which provide greater spatial detail, to achieve more
precise regional guidance. More recent research has shifted
towards more flexible forms of visual instructions: ViP-
LLaVA [86] extended the input to include hand-drawn visual
markers [117], while Draw-and-Understand [87] and OMG-
Seg [118] introduced an external visual prompt encoder.
This allows the model to decode the user’s intent from the
visual channel without compromising its original global
understanding capabilities.
• Enhance the Output Architecture. To reduce the ambiguity
of text-only outputs in complex visual scenes, researchers

===== PAGE 9 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
9
TABLE 3
An overview of CoT-focused training paradigms and the core issues they aim to address.
Method
Venue
Training
Core Problem
Let’s Verify Step–by–Step [104]
ICLR’24
SFT
Outcome-based supervision cannot guarantee the logical correctness of the
problem decomposition process itself.
Multimodal–CoT [105]
ICLR’24
SFT
Text-only reasoning decomposition decouples from visual facts.
ChartGemma [102]
ACL’24
SFT
General MLLMs underperform on charts problems decomposition.
Dolphins [106]
ECCV’24
SFT
Unlocking transferable reasoning capabilities for autonomous driving
through fine-tuning.
Visual CoT [107]
NeurIPS’24
SFT
The individual steps of a problem decomposition are not explicitly
grounded in verifiable local visual evidence.
LLaVA–CoT [108]
arXiv’24
SFT
Problem decomposition is an emergent ability from prompting, not an
innate and robust skill of the model.
LlamaV-o1 [109]
ACL’25
SFT
Whether CoT enhances the adversarial robustness of MLLMs and how
reasoning process behaves under adversarial attacks.
Learning Theorem Rationale [110]
AAAI’25
SFT
When decomposing math problems, the reasoning processes of MLLMs
fail to adhere relevant mathematical theorems.
UV–DPO [111]
arXiv’25
DPO
Learning to ground each step of a visual problem decomposition via SFT
is data-hungry and costly.
Visual Grounded Reasoning [112]
arXiv’25
SFT
The model’s decomposition path is biased by language priors instead of
being driven by fine-grained visual evidence.
VLM–R1 [113]
arXiv’25
SFT+GRPO
SFT is insufficient for finding optimal decomposition policies
Visual–RFT [114]
arXiv’25
SFT+GRPO
It is difficult to define effective reward signals to guide the decomposition
of complex visual problems via Reinforcement Learning.
have explored output architectures capable of generating
pixel-level localization information. Models like LISA [88],
LLM-Seg [119], and OMG-LLaVA [120] introduced a special
token <SEG>, into the vocabulary. The hidden state vector
corresponding to this token is then used as a query to drive
a separate segmentation decoder to generate a mask. This
paradigm was further extended by works like GSVA [89],
MMR [92], Instruction-guided-masking [121] to handle
multi-object and multi-granularity segmentation tasks. To
address the issue of semantic bias in segmentation results,
POPEN [93] employed preference learning to fine-tune the
model and suppress incorrect segmentations. Concurrently,
to reduce the reliance on large-scale, pixel-level annotated
data, works like Llafs [122] and Prompt Highlighter [123]
have investigated instruction-based segmentation under few-
shot or zero-shot conditions. Furthermore, several works [90],
[91], [124], [125] have focused on building a unified output
interface. This enables a single model to generate different
forms of localization results, such as bounding boxes or
segmentation masks, according to the user’s instruction,
thereby accommodating diverse task requirements.
3.2.3
Dynamic Perception
Building upon the static, single-turn vision-language inter-
action paradigm discussed previously, this section focuses
on the implementation of dynamic perception. The core of
these methods is to endow the model with the ability to
actively and iteratively search for visual information, thereby
overcoming the limitations [126] of static perception.
For example, V* [94] employs an LLM-guided hierarchical
visual search. At inference time, it collaborates with an
MLLM to progressively zoom in and look back for evidence,
achieving more fine-grained visual question answering in
high-resolution and crowded scenes. Subsequent research
has focused on reducing training costs and improving
architectural coupling [95], [96], [127]. DyFo [95] formalizes
visual search as a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [128],
interacting with external visual experts to dynamically focus
on key regions in a training-free setting. Taking a step further,
FaST [96] , inspired by the concept of fast and slow thinking,
trains a lightweight, built-in adapter to control the speed of
reasoning based on the problem’s difficulty, enabling human-
like dynamic visual search.
3.3
Enhance Problem Decomposition Ability of MLLMs
Early MLLMs operated on a single-step reasoning paradigm,
the core deficiency of which lies in treating any task as
a monolithic ”input-output” mapping process, without
any explicit problem decomposition. Consequently, these
models often falter when faced with complex reasoning
tasks [129]. To overcome this limitation, research has focused
on endowing models with the ability to perform step-by-step
problem decomposition [130], [131]. The goal is not merely to
improve the accuracy of the final answer, but also to ensure
the correctness and verifiability of the reasoning process.
Presently, most approaches do not employ a built-in,
structured framework for problem decomposition; instead,
they rely on prompting techniques, such as Chain-of-Thought
(CoT), to implicitly steer the model along a decompositional
reasoning path. However, a sole reliance on prompting [105],
[132] is insufficient for internalizing this decompositional
ability within the model’s parameters. The central research
challenge is therefore to transform this decompositional
reasoning from a transient, prompt-induced behavior into
an innate, self-directed capability of the model. To this end,
the academic community [133] is primarily exploring the
following three research directions:
• Enhancing problem decomposition via training. Dedicated
training paradigms can enhance the problem decom-
position ability of Multimodal Large Language Models
(MLLMs), aiming to make their reasoning more visually
grounded and logically sound. (Sec. 3.3.1).
• Automated Synthesis of Training Data. To overcome the
high cost and scalability issues of manual annotation,
researchers have developed automated methods for con-
structing large-scale, high-quality Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
datasets with interleaved visual and textual evidence. (Sec.
3.3.2).

===== PAGE 10 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
10
• Inference-Time Search for Flexible Decomposition. To
overcome the limitations of traditional Chain-of-Thought
(CoT), which follows a single, linear reasoning path and
risks finding suboptimal solutions, researchers are adapt-
ing inference-time search algorithms to explore multiple
reasoning paths and find the best possible answer. (Sec.
3.3.3).
3.3.1
Enhancing Problem Decomposition via Training
The paradigm of enhancing problem decomposition through
process supervision originated in the language-only do-
main [104]. When this paradigm is migrated to multimodal
scenarios, researchers must address a series of new chal-
lenges. The primary issue is that the model’s decomposition
steps must be guided and constrained by visual information
to ensure factual consistency. Secondly, for specialized do-
mains such as mathematics, the model must acquire specific
decomposition structures that align with the field’s intrinsic
logic. In Table 3, we present some representative methods
to give a first-look understanding of prevailing training
paradigms. These methods can be categorized into three
main training paradigms:imitation learning, curriculum
learning and preference learning.
• Imitation Learning. Early CoT methods established a
foundational framework for problem decomposition, but
their generated text-only reasoning paths were prone to
decoupling from visual facts [132]. As the entire reasoning
process unfolded solely at the textual level, the decompo-
sition plan could be flawed from the outset. Consequently,
the core of subsequent research has been to introduce strict
constraints to the decomposition process, ensuring that each
step of the reasoning path and its required evidence remain
consistent with the visual facts. Multimodal-CoT pioneered a
two-stage generation process to achieve implicit supervision
of visual evidence [105]. The model first generates a textual
reasoning chain, which then serves as the condition for
producing the final answer. This sequential dependency
creates an implicit constraint, compelling the initial reasoning
to be visually grounded to ensure the final answer’s accuracy.
Building on this, to enhance the verifiability of decomposition
steps, works like Visual CoT and Visual Grounded Reasoning
supervised the model to cite visual evidence such as bound-
ing boxes, transforming ambiguous linguistic references
into precise, verifiable coordinate localizations [107], [112].
Furthermore, to improve the domain-specific decomposi-
tion logic of MLLMs, works such as ChartGemma [102],
Dolphins [106], ChartInstruct [78], Sce2DriveX [134] and
Learning Theorem Rationale [110] have fine-tuned models on
specialized CoT datasets. This ensures the model’s reasoning
process adheres to the rigorous paradigms of disciplines
like mathematics, thereby validating the effectiveness of its
decomposition.
• Curriculum Learning. More recently, LLaVA-CoT [108] and
LlamaV-o1 [109] have proposed a “de-prompted” Supervised
Fine-Tuning (SFT) paradigm that introduces the concept
of curriculum learning to cultivate the model’s decompo-
sition and reasoning abilities through a phased, easy-to-
hard process. The model’s training unfolds in three stages:
it first learns to decompose complex problems into sub-
problems, then grounds each sub-problem in visual evidence,
and finally integrates this evidence to form a coherent,
summary answer. As a result, these models are trained to
autonomously decompose problems at inference time and
generate intermediate steps and the final answer accordingly.
This curriculum-based training paradigm helps the model
form a more robust and innate reasoning capability. However,
the effectiveness of SFT is limited by its dependence on
imitating a single ”correct” decomposition path. This method
does not equip models to evaluate alternative strategies or
self-correct their reasoning, which limits their generalization
in tasks that require flexible, exploratory reasoning. However,
the effectiveness of SFT is limited by its dependence on
imitating a single ”correct” decomposition path. This method
does not equip models to evaluate alternative strategies or
self-correct their reasoning, which limits their generalization
in tasks that require flexible, exploratory reasoning.
• Preference Learning. The core idea of preference learning
is to learn a predictive model from feedback expressed as
relative preferences. This model aims to capture and inter-
nalize the underlying judgment criteria hidden within the
feedback, thereby enabling it to make preference judgments
on unseen instances that align with those criteria. Unlike
traditional imitation learning, which provides a positive
label for each sample, datasets for preference learning are
composed of preference relationships in forms such as
comparisons, rankings, or ratings. From a policy optimization
perspective, mainstream methods can be divided into on-
policy and off-policy learning.
For on-policy learning, the core principle is that the
data used for policy updates must be generated by the
current version of the policy being optimized. This paradigm
ensures an unbiased update direction and is generally more
stable. Mainstream methods adopt Generalized Reward
Policy Optimization [135] (GRPO) and its variants. For
example, methods like VLM-R1 [113], Visual-RFT [114],
Reason-RFT [136], Seg-Zero [137], R1-OneVision [138] and
RAGEN [139] transform visual evidence from the reasoning
process into verifiable training signals, thereby enhancing
the model’s ability to select better problem decomposition
paths.
For off-policy learning, the core principle is that policy
updates can utilize historical experience data generated by
any previous policy. It significantly improves data efficiency
by correcting for distribution shifts using techniques like
importance sampling. Mainstream methods adopt DPO [140]
(Direct Preference Optimization) and its variants. For in-
stance, UV-CoT [111] generates multiple chains of thought
for the same visual problem, constructs preference pairs
based on visual alignment, step-by-step consistency, and
the correctness of the final answer, and then updates the
policy. V-DPO [141] uses a large number of synthetically
generated image preference pairs to enhance the model’s
inclination to follow visual evidence when decomposing
problems during reasoning. VTS-DPO [142] trains a general-
purpose verifier/scorer offline using preference pairs from
multi-step trajectories to stably evaluate and guide multi-step
visual reasoning at inference time.
3.3.2
Automated Synthesis of Training Data
The effectiveness of supervised learning methods in en-
hancing a model’s problem decomposition ability is highly
dependent on large-scale, high-quality CoT datasets. Early

===== PAGE 11 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
11
Question: What is the 
color of the liquid in the 
cup closest to the marker?
1
2
3
4
Visual evidence
External tools
MLLMs
Text-only CoT: 
Step 1
Find the location of the marker.
Step 2 Compare the distance of cups and          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
marker.
Step 3 Check the color of the liquid.
Input image
Vision to text:
Text to vision:
Interleaved:
Evidence Generation
CoT Generation
MLLMs
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Answer
1
2
3
4
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Answer
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
1
2
3
4
Answer
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
1
2
3
4
Fig. 6. An example of how to construct an interleaved CoT. We demonstrate three typical ways in the image. The main difference is that, interleaved
method generates text rationales and visual evidence in a coherent way, while another two generate text and visual evidence respectively.
benchmarks, such as ScienceQA [143] and A-OKVQA [144],
provided detailed, manually annotated reasoning steps and
answers for each problem. However, manual annotation
is costly, has limited scalability, and struggles to meet the
data volume requirements of current training paradigms.
Furthermore, this approach often lacks visual evidence
grounding for the intermediate steps, making it ineffective at
enhancing a model’s ability to decompose specifically visual
problems. To mitigate these issues, researchers have adopted
automated data synthesis methods. It is important to note
that “synthesis” here is defined broadly, encompassing both
the generation of entirely new CoT [132] data from scratch for
specific tasks, as well as the reprocessing and enhancement
of existing datasets which mainly rely on augmenting text-
only reasoning processes with visual evidence. Based on
the methods for generating and processing CoT data, these
approaches can be categorized into two primary strategies:
generation via external teacher models and bootstrapped
data generation.
• Generation via External Teacher Models. This paradigm
primarily employs a teacher model to automate the genera-
tion of CoT datasets. Its core task is to decompose a vision-
language reasoning problem step-by-step, providing both the
correct reasoning process and the final answer. However, the
key challenge lies in ensuring that the decomposition path
generated by the model is not only logically sound at the
textual level but also tightly aligned with the visual evidence.
To address this challenge, researchers have explored various
synthesis strategies. As illustrated in Fig. 6, these strate-
gies can be categorized into three mainstream approaches
based on the sequence in which the textual decomposition
steps and the visual evidence are generated and verified:
Vision-to-Text, Text-to-Vision and Interleaved Vision-Text
Generation.
(a) Text-to-Vision. The Text-to-Vision (T2V) paradigm
first constructs a text-only reasoning sequence and subse-
quently matches each textual reasoning step with corre-
sponding visual evidence to build the interleaved reasoning
dataset. For example, Cogcom [145] first uses a teacher model
to generate a reasoning process that contains placeholders
for visual operations. It then executes these operations
to populate the visual results and searches the resulting
branching tree with a DFS [146] algorithm to retrieve the
optimal reasoning path. The data construction process for
Mint-CoT [147] is based on the existing Mulberry-260K [148]
dataset. It begins by filtering for mathematical problems and
their text-only solutions. Next, it utilizes Optical Character
Recognition (OCR) to extract key visual tokens from the
corresponding images. Finally, a teacher model is employed
to precisely align each textual reasoning step with the visual
tokens upon which it depends. However, in this construction
paradigm, the generation processes for textual reasoning
and visual evidence are entirely decoupled, which can easily
introduce hard-to-correct visual hallucinations at the source.
(b) Vision-to-Text. This paradigm employs a vision-first
approach, where a textual rationale is generated only after vi-
sual evidence has been established. Representative works like
MM-GCoT [149] and SIFThinker [150] simulate the human
viewing pattern by proceeding from a global scan to local
details to identify and structure this evidence. Similarly, Pixel-
Reasoner [151] first uses a teacher model to locate key visual
cues and obtain local views before generating its analysis. In
these methods, the process is an evidence-driven ”reverse
induction”: the textual reasoning is retroactively generated
to describe and connect the pre-selected visual cues. While
this approach effectively eliminates factual hallucinations
by design, its fundamental drawback is that the resulting
decomposition is not a top-down problem-solving strategy.
Instead, its structure is dictated by the sequence of visual
observations, which can lead to a reasoning path that is
unnatural, inefficient, or logically suboptimal, despite being
factually correct at every step.
(c) Interleaved Vision-Text Generation. The joint synthe-
sis of textual reasoning and visual evidence represents a less
prevalent research direction. For instance, approaches like
LATTE [152] and TACO [153] adopt a collaborative paradigm
between a teacher model and multiple external visual tools,
in which the teacher model is responsible for decomposing
complex problems and planning the reasoning steps. When
needed, it calls upon specific visual tools to acquire precise
visual evidence. The results returned by these tools are then
fed back into the reasoning process, creating a “think-act-

===== PAGE 12 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
12
Positive samples generation
Questions
Student
MLLM
Reasoning 
process
Reasoning 
paths
Visual 
evidence 
Thinking…
Refinement 
process
High quality 
training data
Initial answers
Refine
Reasoning 
paths
Visual 
evidence 
Refinement criteria
2. Reasoning validity
1. Answer correctness
3. Visual grounding
Training samples
2. Logic step-wise reasoning
1. Correct Answer
3. Visually grounded evidence
Teacher 
MLLM
Student
MLLM
High quality samples
Low quality samples
High quality samples
Low quality samples
High quality 
training data
Drop
Re-generate from questions
Correct
Refinement
Data processing
Data 
processing
Judger 1
Judger 2
High quality 
training data
Drop
Correct
Visual 
evidence 
Judger 
1 or 2?
Ground 
truth
Fig. 7. An illustration of positive samples refinement.
observe” loop that ultimately generates an interleaved vision-
language Chain-of-Thought.
• Bootstrapped Data Generation. To reduce the reliance on
external teacher models, some works employ bootstrapping
methods to generate CoT data. The core mechanism is to
leverage the model’s own capabilities to generate diverse
reasoning paths for a given problem. These paths are then
classified as positive or negative samples. This classification
is based on the quality of their final outcomes or the logical
validity of their reasoning process, with the evaluation
performed either by the model itself or by external models.
To ensure a rich set of negative examples, some methods also
proactively generate them by intentionally injecting errors
into the input or the reasoning chain. Through training on
such curated data, the model learns to discriminate among
candidate reasoning trajectories and prefer those yielding
correct, evidence-aligned solutions. Based on whether the
generated training data includes negative samples, we
classify the methods into two categories: Positive Sample
Refinement and Preference Data Generation. As illustrated
in Fig. 7, we demonstrate the generation of positive samples.
(a) Positive Sample Refinement. In the text-only domain,
early research such as STaR [154] proposed a method for
dynamically augmenting datasets. In this process, the model
first generates decomposition paths for a problem based
on few-shot examples. If a path proves effective and yields
the correct answer, it is considered a high-quality training
sample. If not, the model is guided to reverse-engineer a
rational decomposition strategy from the correct answer.
These corrected and validated high-quality samples are then
fed back into the training set, creating a loop of continuous
dataset optimization and simultaneous improvement of the
model’s capabilities.
In the multimodal domain, this dataset construction
strategy has been adapted to generate more complex rea-
soning samples that contain visual evidence. For instance,
MC-CoT [155] constructs training data via bootstrapped
filtering to improve the consistency [156] of smaller models
in problem decomposition. It first prompts the model to
self-iterate and generate multiple candidate decomposition
Questions
Reasoning path 1
Reasoning path 2
Reasoning path 3
Student MLLM
Teacher MLLM
Judger
Path1 (scoring: 0.9/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.8/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.3/1)
Preferred
Preferred
Unpreferred
Questions
Reasoning path 1
Reasoning path 2
Reasoning path 3
Student MLLM
Teacher MLLM
Judger
Path1 (scoring: 0.9/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.2/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.1/1)
Inject disturbance
Preferred
Unpreferred
Unpreferred
Questions
Reasoning path 1
Reasoning path 2
Reasoning path 3
Student MLLM
Teacher MLLM
Judger
Path1 (scoring: 0.9/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.2/1)
Path2 (scoring: 0.1/1)
Inject disturbance
Preferred
Unpreferred
Unpreferred
Baseline preference selection
Input perturbation hard negatives
Reasoning-chain corruption hard negatives
Fig. 8. An example of how to construct preference data. We obtain
negative training samples by injecting perturbations into either the inputs
or the candidate CoT outputs; alternatively, negatives can be collected
without explicit perturbations.
paths. It then uses self-evaluation and a consistency voting
mechanism to filter for the solution with the strongest consen-
sus, which is then used as a positive sample for contrastive
training against the correct label. GCOT [157] demonstrates
how to construct an interleaved vision-language Chain-of-
Thought dataset with limited data. This method begins by
decomposing a complex problem into a series of initial ”sub-
problem, bounding box” pairs to form a seed dataset. The
model then trains on this dataset while continuously filtering
and optimizing, retaining only the bounding boxes that best
match the visual facts, ultimately producing a complete
interleaved CoT dataset.
(b) Preference Data Generation. Beyond generating only
positive samples, other works focus on the automatic con-
struction of preference pairs for offline learning methods like
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [140]. As is depicted
in Fig. 8, we give an example of how to construct preference
data. This is primarily achieved through two strategies: judge-
based scoring and bootstrapping. The former uses an external
or base model as a “judge” to score multiple candidate
responses. This is implemented by either evaluating the
final outcomes of different reasoning paths [158], [159],
[160] or by using the model’s capacity for self-correction
to create positive and negative pairs [161]. The latter strategy,
bootstrapping, proactively generates negative samples by
injecting perturbations. For example, BPO [162] perturbs the
image input or injects logical errors into the reasoning chain
to automatically create valuable negative samples.
3.3.3
Inference-Time Search for Flexible Decomposition
The traditional CoT paradigm guides a model along a
single, linear reasoning path. This process is essentially a
greedy search strategy, which risks converging on a locally
optimal path while missing the globally optimal solution.
To overcome this limitation, methodologies originating from
the text-only domain, designed to enhance the flexibility of
the reasoning process, are being progressively adapted for
multimodal tasks.

===== PAGE 13 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
13
Think
Observe
Act
Endogenous methods
focus on Inner ability
Single forward
Multiple forward
Vision 
encoder
LLM
Image
query
Re-focus
× n rounds
Key region attention weight 
Vision 
encoder
LLM
Image
query
Re-encode
× n rounds
ROI
ROI tokens
Exogenous methods
focus on tool calling
MLLM
Tools API
Query
Image
Return
Outcome
Info Re-inject
MLLM
Tool Calling Process
Main process
Generate 
output
Judge process
Judge
Use tool
Tool calling
Text-only  reasoning
Plan which 
tools to use
Info 
enough?
No
Yes
Back to main process
Fig. 9. An illustration of thinking with image.
These methods replace the single, deterministic gen-
eration process by exploring a broader solution space.
Foundational work such as Tree of Thoughts (ToT) [163]
conceptualizes the reasoning process as a tree, where each
node represents a partial solution or an intermediate thought.
It systematically explores this tree using algorithms like
Breadth-First Search (BFS) [164] or Depth-First Search (DFS),
enabling backtracking and the exploration of multiple
reasoning paths. Building on this foundation, a series of
advanced decoding strategies [156], [165], [166], [167] have
been proposed, which employ diverse sampling and voting
mechanisms to identify the most robust answer. More
recently, techniques like AlphaMath [168], Rest-mcts* [169],
and SVPO [170] model the reasoning process as a Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) problem, allowing the model to
dynamically allocate more computational resources to the
most promising branches of the reasoning tree.
Although
these advanced
search
algorithms
have
achieved success in unimodal tasks, their application in
the multimodal domain is still in its nascent stages. Recent
research has begun to bridge this gap, VisuoThink [171] ex-
tends the foundational ToT algorithm into a forward-looking
tree search algorithm. Meanwhile, Socratic-MCTS [172],
vrest [173] and A star [174] have adapted MCTS to the
vision-language domain. These methods model the visual
question answering task as the construction of a reasoning
tree composed of nodes representing (sub-question, sub-
answer) tuples. A key innovation in this adaptation is the
use of the model’s own self-consistency score with respect to
visual evidence as a reward signal to guide the tree search.
This promotes the generation of more visually-grounded
reasoning paths.
3.4
Dynamic Forensics During Reasoning
MLLMs typically employ a static, single-pass visual encoding
mechanism when processing complex vision-language rea-
soning tasks, converting the image into a fixed representation
before inference begins. However, a complex reasoning
process demands that the model dynamically refocus its
attention on the most critical visual evidence based on its
evolving inferential needs. The existing static mechanism
restricts this dynamic interaction, making it prone to two crit-
ical flaws: first, the initial visual information tends to decay
as text generation progresses. Secondly, the model may over-
rely on its linguistic priors, generating hallucinations [175],
[176] that contradict the visual facts.
The core solution is to establish a “think with image” [33]
reasoning loop, thereby enabling the model to continuously
revisit visual evidence during inference. As illustrated in
Fig. 9, we illustrate the Think–Act–Observe reasoning loop.
This section focuses on the central strategy for implementing
such a loop: constructing interleaved vision-language Chains-
of-Thought. Based on the source of the visual evidence used
in this construction, the approaches can be classified into two
main categories:
• Vision-Language Alignment via Endogenous Visual Evi-
dence Injection. To enable a model to dynamically refocus
on visual evidence during reasoning without using exter-
nal tools, researchers have developed endogenous methods
that leverage the model’s internal mechanisms. (Sec. 3.4.1).
• Vision-Language Alignment via Exogenous Visual Evi-
dence Injection. Exogenous methods treat the Multimodal
Large Language Model (MLLM) as an intelligent agent
that actively gathers visual evidence by calling external
tools, creating an ”observe-act-decide” reasoning loop.(Sec.
3.4.2).
3.4.1
Vision-Language Alignment via Endogenous Visual
Evidence Injection
Endogenous methods aim to refocus on relevant visual infor-
mation through the model’s internal attention mechanisms,
without relying on external tools. Based on the coupling
between the reasoning process and the visual encoder, these
methods can be classified into two categories: those involving
a single forward pass and those involving multiple forward
passes. In Table 4, we provide an overview of the methods
that takes this paradigm.
A single forward pass approach involves the encoder
performing one global encoding of the visual input prior
to inference. During the subsequent text generation and

===== PAGE 14 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
14
TABLE 4
An overview of representative methods about endogenous visual evidence injection.
Method
Venue
Granularity
Main Contribution
(a) Single forward pass.
CVC [177]
IJCAI’25
token
Proposing a mask-then-predict strategy that re-weights attention toward
salient visual cues when needed.
ICoT [178]
CVPR’25
bbox
Selecting the most relevant regions via attention maps and re-encodes the
corresponding crops.
MINT-CoT [147]
arXiv’25
token
Before each reasoning step, identify the most relevant visual tokens and
re-inject them to guide generation.
Look-back [179]
arXiv’25
token
Invoking an internal look-back mechanism to revisit previously attended
visual cues when inconsistency is detected.
(b) Multi forward passes.
CogCoM [145]
ICLR’25
bbox
Introducing chain-of-manipulations reasoning that iteratively localizes,
acts on, and verifies regions.
DeepEyes [180]
arXiv’25
bbox
Using end-to-end RL to decide when to re-encode task-critical regions.
Pixel Reasoner [151]
arXiv’25
bbox
Training with SFT+RL to plan and execute visual operations and iteratively
refine evidence.
SIFThinker [150]
arXiv’25
bbox + depth
Simulating human visual search and augmenting with depth cues to
strengthen spatial reasoning.
CMMCoT [181]
arXiv’25
bbox
Maintaining a memory bank to aggregate cross-image evidence for multi-
image reasoning, revisiting key regions as needed.
reasoning phase, the model dynamically assigns higher
attention weights to critical visual information based on
the current reasoning context, thereby integrating visual
evidence into the process. In contrast, a multiple forward
passes approach allows the model to actively request a re-
encoding of specific visual regions based on intermediate
reasoning results. This enables it to obtain higher-resolution
or more targeted features on an on-demand basis.
• Single Forward Pass. Initially, MM-COT [105] proposed a
method to simulate refocusing. It first takes the image and the
initial question as input to generate a Chain-of-Thought text
containing key visual evidence, which is then concatenated
back with the original input to derive the final answer.
However, this approach suffers from a rigid interaction
pattern and is computationally expensive. To address this
issue, subsequent works have adopted strategies based on
implicit and explicit attention guidance. Implicit attention
guidance aims to redistribute attention through internal
mechanisms without explicit visual cues; for instance, Look-
back [179] achieves an implicit “re-look” by dynamically
adjusting attention weights on key objects during text
generation, while CVC [177] masks specific image regions
to compel the model to backtrack and use other visual cues.
Explicit attention guidance, in contrast, relies on clearly
defined visual evidence. Point-RFT [182], for example, uses
bounding box coordinates to direct the model’s attention to
a specific area, whereas other works like Don’t Look Only
Once [183], MINT-CoT [147] and ICOT [178] dynamically
select the most relevant visual tokens from global features to
aid the current reasoning step.
• Multiple Forward Passes. To obtain more reliable visual
evidence, a line of research employs the strategy of multiple
forward passes. Initial methods like Textcot [184] follow a
sequential “describe-then-crop” paradigm, which generate
a detailed image description to guide the cropping and
reasoning over these image areas. However, this approach
is prone to the loss of fine-grained visual details and suffers
from an inflexible reasoning process. To overcome this,
Studies such as CMMCoT [181] realize “think with image”
paradigm by dynamically interleaving visual grounding
with the ongoing reasoning process. This is achieved by
adaptively re-encoding key regions of interest (RoIs) at
crucial steps and injecting these updated visual features into
the subsequent reasoning chain. However, when to seek for
more visual information is still an open question for commu-
nity. Currently, some works like Sketchpad adopt in-context
learning to follow prompts [185], works such as Chain-of-
spot [186], PromViL [187], Vocot [188] adopt supervised
fine-tuning to imitate expert paths, and works including
Deepeyes [180], PixelReasoner [151], Active-O3 [189] and
VLM-R3 [190] adopt reinforcement learning to autonomously
discover the optimal timing.
Further advancements build upon this paradigm, enhanc-
ing the quality and granularity of visual information acquired
during reasoning. For instance, CogCoM [145] broadens
the visual action space into a composable “chain of opera-
tions” like localization and labeling. Meanwhile, to improve
spatial understanding, SIFThinker [150], PixelThink [191]
and LLaVA-Aurora [192] introduce depth information to
enable joint object-level and spatial perception. This line of
research has culminated in unified frameworks, such as the
“RoI re-encoding and visual token re-sampling” proposed by
Argus [193], which significantly enhances visual grounding
while maintaining reasoning efficiency.
3.4.2
Vision-Language Alignment via Exogenous Visual
Evidence Injection
Exogenous methods frame the MLLM as an intelligent
agent that dynamically acquires visual evidence by calling
external tools or interacting with an environment, creating
an “observe-act-decide” reasoning loop. This paradigm has
evolved from an early “plan-then-execute” model to a more
flexible, interleaved Chain-of-Thought approach. In Table 5,
we provide an overview of the methods that takes this
paradigm.
Pioneering works such as Visual Programming [199],
ViperGPT [195], HuggingGPT [200] and InternGPT [201]
established a tool-assisted reasoning paradigm where the
model performs a one-shot decomposition of a complex
problem into a sequence of tool calls, often guided by in-

===== PAGE 15 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
15
TABLE 5
An overview of representative methods about exogenous visual evidence injection.
Method
Venue
Tools
Main Contribution
(a) In Context Learning.
MM-ReAct [194]
arXiv’23
Visual experts
Proposing calling visual tools whenever a reasoning step requires addi-
tional evidence.
ViperGPT [195]
ICCV’23
GLIP/X-VLM/MiDaS
Introducing a program-as-agent paradigm that generates executable code
to invoke visual tools.
CLOVA [196]
CVPR’24
OWL-ViT/BLIP/CLIP
Introducing learnable prompts to select and adapt tool usage during
reasoning.
Visual Sketchpad [185]
NeurIPS’24
SAM/G-DINO/Matplotlib
Mimicing human problem solving by sketching while reasoning.
(b) Fine Tuning.
LLaVA-Plus [197]
ECCV’24
OCR/SAM/BLIP2
Training on tool-grounded manipulation traces, improving the model’s
ability to use tools.
TACO [153]
ICLR 2025
DepthAnything/OCR/SAM
Invoking external tools when a step requires additional evidence or
verification.
OpenThinking [198]
arXiv’25
Crop/Point/Zoomin
Proposing a unified API for visual operations to standardize and streamline
tool invocation.
context learning (ICL) [202]. An executor then runs this
pre-defined plan to generate a final answer. While this
approach offers a clear planning path, its rigidity and lack
of dynamic feedback make it brittle in complex, multi-step
interactions and highly dependent on prompt engineering.
To overcome this rigidity, subsequent research has shifted
towards an adaptive, interleaved Chain-of-Thought model.
In this paradigm, the model makes a decision at each
reasoning step, selecting and executing a relevant visual
operation and then using the immediate observation to
inform its next action. The model acquires this step-by-step
reasoning capability through either in-context learning or
fine-tuning.
• In-Context Learning. Early works like ReAct [203] and
MM-ReAct [194], along with later approaches such as Visual
Sketchpad [185], primarily rely on the in-context learning
(ICL) capabilities of powerful foundation models, using
meticulously designed prompts to guide tool use. While
this method is highly flexible, it places stringent demands on
the model’s instruction-following capabilities and depends
heavily on high-quality prompt engineering. Consequently,
its stability is often challenged in complex tasks. To improve
the robustness of ICL, subsequent research like CLOVA [196]
and VisRep [204] has introduced execution feedback and
self-correction mechanisms.
• Fine-Tuning. To internalize tool-use capabilities as an
intrinsic skill, a significant body of research has employed
fine-tuning. For instance, works like LATTE [205], LLaVA-
Plus [197], DWIM [206], Refocus [207] and VPD [208] use
supervised fine-tuning on tool-use trajectory data to teach
the model when and how to use tools. Building upon this,
MLLM-Tool [209] expands the modality into audio. In pursuit
of more optimal decision-making policies, VTool-R1 [210]
and Visual-ARFT [211] introduce reinforcement learning,
training the model to master the best timing and sequence
for tool calls through trial and error. Furthermore, to enhance
the generality and usability of this paradigm, researches such
as OpenThinkimg [198] has encapsulated diverse visual tools
into a unified API, allowing the model to dispatch them
on-demand during inference.
In summary, this section has systematically reviewed the
cutting-edge methodologies for enhancing the interactive
reasoning capabilities of MLLMs, structured along our
proposed “From Perception to Cognition” framework. At
the perceptual level, the research has progressed along two
major trends: one involves adopting dynamic strategies that
integrate multiple expert encoders to capture richer, multi-
granularity features; the other focuses on unifying image
generation and understanding tasks, leveraging the powerful
representational capabilities of generative models to enhance
the perceptual foundation.
At the cognitive level, the focus has shifted from
initial reliance on prompt-engineered, single-path imita-
tion learning to a more systematic, multi-paradigm fusion.
This includes supervised fine-tuning on visually-grounded
Chain-of-Thought data, employing preference learning (e.g.,
DPO/GRPO) to select among multiple candidate paths, and
utilizing tree-based search at inference time to explore a
more optimal solution space. This convergence of methods
aims to endow models with greater autonomy in problem
decomposition and dynamic verification.
This synergistic development at both the perceptual
and cognitive levels has collectively driven significant ad-
vancements in MLLM capabilities. However, to objectively
measure the effectiveness of these methods and to reveal
their strengths and limitations in specific application scenar-
ios, a systematic evaluation framework is essential. In the
next chapter, we will delve into the key benchmarks and
applications used to assess these advanced models.
4
APPLICATIONS AND BENCHMARK
4.1
Scientific Problem Solving
Early multimodal large models primarily focused on fun-
damental visual-language alignment. In the domain of
visual-textual reasoning, pioneering benchmarks such as
VQA [212] and its successor, VQA-v2 [213], trained models
to answer basic questions like ”What is in the image?”
Subsequently, GQA [214] enabled preliminary visual rea-
soning by introducing compositional questions. However,
these models operated predominantly at the perceptual
level, concentrating on object recognition. While subsequent
developments introduced benchmarks such as VCR [215],
which requires models to provide rationales; OK-VQA [216]
and A-OKVQA, which incorporate external knowledge; and
LoRA [217], which systematically evaluates logical reasoning

===== PAGE 16 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
16
Question: Will these magnets 
attract or repel each other?
Choices: A:  repel  B:  attract
Contest: Two magnets are 
placed as shown. Hint: Magnets 
that attract pull together. 
Magnets that repel push apart.
Lecture: Every 
 has two ends, a 
 and a 
. How 
magnets 
 depends on which 
 are closest. 
 will 
 each other, while 
 will 
 each other.
Solution:  To see if the magnets will 
 or 
, look at the poles closest 
to each other. The 
 of one 
magnet is closest to the
 of 
the other. Since the 
, 
these magnets will 
.
 
Question: Complete the 
statement. Propane is ().
Choices: A:  an elementary 
substance  B:  a compound
Contest: The model below 
represents a molecule
 of propane. Propane 
is used as 5fuel for
 heaters,engines, 
and outdoor grills.
Answer: a compound
Lecture: All 
 are made of 
. An elementary 
substance has one element, while a 
 has two or more 
. Each element has a 
, like B for boron. Models can 
show 
 of 
, like 
boron trichloride.
Solution:  The model shows propane is 
made of two elements: carbon (C) and 
hydrogen (H). Because it contains 
multiple elements bonded together, 
propane is a compound.
Question: 
Select the reptile below.
Choices:  A:  coral snake  
                B:  sea otter
Contest: Reptiles have scaly, 
waterproof skin. Most
 reptiles live on land. A 
helmeted iguana is an 
example of a reptile.
Answer: coral snake
Lecture: 
, 
, 
, 
, 
and 
 are groups of 
. 
The animals in each group have 
. Scientists sort animals into 
groups based on 
 they have in 
common. This process is called 
.
Solution:  A coral snake is a reptile. It 
has scaly, waterproof skin. A sea otter is 
a mammal. It has fur and feeds its 
young milk.
Scientific Problem Solving
Question: Does this passage 
describe the weather or the 
climate?
Choices: A:  weather  B:  climate
Contest: Chicago is known as 
The Windy City. But on average, 
the wind there only blows at 
about 10 miles per 
hour. Weather is what 
the atmosphere is like 
at a certain place and time. 
Climate is the pattern of 
weather in a certain place.
Answer: repel
Answer: climate
Lecture: The 
 is the air 
surrounding Earth, and it is described 
by 
and 
. 
 is the 
atmosphere's condition at a 
, and it can 
. 
 is the 
 in a certain place.
Solution: The passage describes 
Chicago's 
, not 
the 
. Because it refers to a 
, it is describing the 
city's 
.
Fig. 10. Scientific Problem Solving Dataset Examples, featuring questions in physics, biology, geography, and chemistry.
capabilities, they still fell short of addressing the core
challenge in scientific problem-solving: abstract symbolic
reasoning [218]. Although several specialized evaluation
benchmarks have been designed, including RAVEN [219] for
analogical reasoning, AlgoPuzzleVQA [220] for algorithmic
reasoning, the Spatial Commonsense Benchmark [221] for
spatial awareness, and Fig-QA [222] for figurative language
understanding, these benchmarks remain insufficient for ade-
quately measuring the rigorous, multi-step, and deterministic
deductive reasoning required in the scientific domain [223].
To address this challenge, ScienceQA [224] was one of the
first and most complex benchmarks created specifically for
scientific problem-solving. Its dataset comprises over 20,000
multimodal questions from grade 3-12 science curricula,
covering fields such as natural sciences, social sciences, and
language arts. A distinguishing feature of ScienceQA is that
each question is annotated with a complete chain of thought
[225]. This design enables not only the evaluation of the
final answer’s correctness but also the scrutiny of the logical
coherence of the model’s reasoning process. In Fig. 10, we
provide several examples drawn from scientific problem-
solving datasets.Another critical benchmark is MathVista
[226], which systematically integrates 28 existing visual-
mathematics datasets to create a comprehensive evaluation
suite. This suite covers seven core reasoning types, includ-
ing algebra, geometry, and statistics [218], and features a
dedicated section of IQTest [226] puzzles.
For a more comprehensive assessment, MathVerse [227]
and MATH-V [228] provide high-quality problems sourced
from actual mathematics competitions. Concurrently, to
extend evaluation into broader scientific disciplines, MDK12-
Bench [229] utilizes authentic K-12 examination questions,
and SCI-Reason [230] employs multi-panel illustrations from
scientific papers. To assess model robustness, MATHREAL
[231] constructs its dataset by introducing real-world noise,
while MATHCHECK [232] and UGMathBench [233] test
model stability through diversified tasks. Similar bench-
marks include EMMA [234], for evaluating multidisciplinary
reasoning; MV-MATH [235], for handling multiple visual
inputs; RMath [236], with a focus on logical reasoning; and
MMMU [237], which concentrates on multimodal mathe-
matical understanding. These benchmarks are built upon
foundational datasets like GSM8k [238] and MATH [239].
To prevent performance saturation of leading models on
existing benchmarks, R-Bench [240] and MR-MATH [241]
have begun to incorporate problems from the graduate level
and even from contemporary mathematical research.
We have summarized the performance of mainstream
multimodal models on several scientific problem-solving
benchmarks, namely MathVista, MathVerse, MATH-V, MV-
MATH, and MMMU, as presented in Table 6. The evaluation
results indicate that among proprietary models, Gemini 2.5
Pro demonstrated exceptional, state-of-the-art performance,
achieving the highest scores across all five benchmarks.
This indicates its superior capabilities in handling cogni-
tive tasks such as complex symbolic operations, geometric-
spatial imagination, and multi-step logical deduction. This
superior performance can be attributed to its advanced
internal reasoning architecture, which employs mechanisms
analogous to a chain of thought to conduct deep, multi-
path exploration and verification of problems [258], thereby
significantly enhancing its solution accuracy for complex
mathematical problems. Among open-source models, the
InternVL3 series exhibited outstanding performance, particu-
larly the version enhanced with VisualPRM-BoS [259], which
improved scores by 4 to 10 percentage points compared to
the baseline version. The core advantage of this technology
lies in its adoption of process supervision, which replaces
the conventional outcome supervision that focuses only on
the final result. Specifically, during the reasoning phase,
the model first employs a Best-of-N sampling strategy to
generate multiple, logically diverse candidate reasoning

===== PAGE 17 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
17
TABLE 6
Performance comparison on scientific problem-solving benchmarks. The
best-performing model’s scores are highlighted in bold.
Models
MathVista
(Acc ↑)
MathVerse
(Acc ↑)
MATH-V
(Acc ↑)
MV-MATH
(Acc ↑)
MMMU
(Acc ↑)
Human
60.3
-
68.82
76.5
88.6
Random Choice
17.9
12.4
7.17
-
22.1
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.5 Pro [242]
84.6
84.6
67.3
73.3
82.0
Gemini 2.5 Flash [242]
81.2
-
-
-
79.7
Gemini 2.0 Pro [243]
-
67.3
48.1
-
69.9
Gemini 2.0 Flash [243]
72.2
47.8
43.6
-
72.6
Gemini 1.5 Pro [244]
68.3
68.1
-
29.1
65.8
GPT-5 [245]
82.7
-
-
-
-
GPT-4o [25]
63.8
40.6
31.2
32.1
70.7
GPT-4 Turbo [246]
66.8
66.8
46.7
-
56.8
GPT-4V [247]
-
-
-
-
56.0
Grok-3 [248]
-
-
-
-
78.0
o1 [249]
73.9
-
-
-
78.2
Claude 3.5 Sonnet [250]
67.7
46.7
41.9
33.9
75.0
Qwen-VL-Max [251]
-
-
-
42.4
75.0
Kimi-k1.5 [252]
74.9
-
38.6
-
70
Open-Source Models
InternVL3 (78B) [253]
75.1
48.2
34.2
-
72.2
InternVL3 (38B) [253]
75.1
44.4
37.2
-
70.1
InternVL3 (14B) [253]
71.6
39.8
29.3
-
67.1
InternVL3 (8B) [253]
71.6
39.8
29.3
24.2
62.7
QVQ-72B-Preview [254]
71.4
-
35.9
29.3
70.3
Qwen2.5-VL (72B) [23]
74.8
57.6
38.1
-
70.2
Qwen2.5-VL (8B) [23]
67.8
41.1
25.4
-
55.0
LLaVA-OneVision (72B) [255]
67.1
27.2
25.3
-
56.8
LLaVA-OneVision (7B) [255]
58.6
19.3
18.3
-
48.8
Llama 3.2 (90B) [256]
57.3
-
-
-
60.3
Ovis2 (34B) [257]
76.1
50.1
31.9
-
-
Ovis2 (16B) [257]
-
45.8
30.1
-
-
paths. Subsequently, a fine-tuned Visual Process Reward
Model (Visual PRM) functions as an external evaluator to
perform a granular assessment and scoring of each step
within every candidate path. The system ultimately selects
the path with the highest cumulative reward, representing
the most validated reasoning process, as the final output. This
synergistic ”generate-and-verify” [225] mechanism ensures
that the correctness of the answer is founded upon a logically
rigorous and procedurally reliable process, rather than being
an incidental outcome. This approach significantly enhances
the robustness and accuracy of the model’s reasoning.
Collectively, the performance of these models is strongly
correlated with their capabilities for robust chain-of-thought
generation, multi-path exploration and verification, and
self-evaluation and correction during the reasoning process.
Future advancements will need to focus on enhancing the
cognitive intelligence of these models and their capacity for
knowledge integration and innovation when confronted with
novel, open-ended problems [218]. The key challenge is to
transition from solving closed-domain textbook problems to
addressing open-ended, research-level questions [260], while
ensuring that their reasoning processes are not only correct
in their outcomes but also logically aligned with human
cognitive patterns.
Q: What is the most likely 
diagnosis based on this 
abdominal CT image?
This is a chest X-ray, and I cannot 
determine the overall size of the 
liver.
Okay, based on the image analysis, 
the liver's gravitational constant 
meets the health standard.
Fig. 11. An example of a FAKE question. Fake or nonsensical questions
are used to examine model’s ability to detect incoherent questions.
4.2
Medical Diagnosis
Medical imaging, which directly reflects the state of the
human body, is a critical component of clinical decision-
making. In the medical field, even minor errors can lead to
severe consequences. Consequently, the focus of evaluation
has rapidly shifted toward reliability, with a particular
emphasis on combating ”hallucinations.” Early medical VQA
benchmarks, such as VQA-RAD [261], laid the groundwork
for the field. Constructed by clinicians using authentic radio-
logical images, its questions and answers are typically concise
and focus on the identification of anatomical structures
and abnormal findings. However, with the advancement
of generative models, the phenomenon of fabricating plau-
sible but incorrect information has emerged as the most
significant safety concern in medical AI. To address this,
HALT-MedVQA [262] was specifically designed. In addition
to standard medical question-answer pairs, its construction
involved the deliberate introduction of numerous nonsensical
or factually contradictory probe questions, in Fig. 11, we
provide an example of a probe question. The primary
objective of this benchmark is not to measure how many
questions a model can answer correctly, but to test its ability
to recognize and refuse to answer inappropriate queries, akin
to the rigorous standards of a medical professional.
The success of VQA-RAD spurred the creation of a
series of benchmarks targeting different medical special-
ties. For example, PathVQA [263] focuses on pathology
images, Kvasir-VQA [264] on gastrointestinal diagnosis,
EndoVis-17/18-VQLA [265] on robotic surgery scenarios,
and MicroVQA [266] on expert-level scientific reasoning
for biological microscopy images. In parallel, benchmarks
such as Med-VQA [267], SLAKE [268], and PMC-VQA
[269] have been developed to construct larger-scale, more
comprehensive general medical question-answering datasets
covering a wider range of modalities. The intense focus
on the core issue of ”hallucinations” has also led to the
development of systematic evaluation frameworks beyond
HALT-MedVQA, including MedHallBench [270] and Med-
HallMark [271].
We have summarized the performance of various open-
source and proprietary large models in the field of medical
diagnosis, as shown in Table 7. The results indicate that while
the most advanced models have approached or even sur-
passed human-level performance on certain tasks like VQA-
RAD, a significant gap remains on benchmarks requiring
sophisticated pathological understanding and knowledge-
based reasoning, such as PathVQA, where they lag behind
human experts (85.2%). Among all models, Med-PaLM M

===== PAGE 18 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
18
TABLE 7
Performance comparison on medical diagnosis benchmarks. The
best-performing model’s scores are highlighted in bold.
Models
VQA-RAD
(Acc ↑)
SLAKE
(Acc ↑)
Path-VQA
(Acc ↑)
Med-VQA
(Acc ↑)
PMC-VQA
(Acc ↑)
Human
77.3
93.4
85.2
-
-
Proprietary Models
Gemini 1.0 Pro [275]
73.4
79.5
56.6
62.0
60.1
GPT-4V
86.6
85.8
66.8
76.5
70.3
Med-PaLM M [272]
90.0
90.5
75.0
81.3
70.4
Open-Source Models
CogVLM (17B) [276]
78.0
83.9
60.1
63.9
-
CogVLM (Chat) [276]
79.8
84.1
61.3
-
-
InstructBLIP (13B) [99]
58.3
76.2
45.4
-
46.1
LLaVA-Med (13B) [76]
72.5
82.1
54.0
50.2
52.6
LLaVA-Med (7B) [76]
68.0
79.5
49.6
50.2
49.3
Med-Flamingo (80B) [277]
81.5
86.8
70.3
-
-
MedVInT (13B) [269]
75.4
83.1
58.2
-
51.5
MedVInT (7B) [269]
71.3
81.0
53.6
-
51.5
MiniGPT-v2 (7B) [278]
63.2
77.1
45.4
47.7
46.1
Qwen-VL-Chat (9B) [279]
61.2
76.5
49.2
48.9
47.9
Qwen-VL-Chat (1.8B) [279]
53.4
69.8
41.6
-
47.9
[272], a proprietary model specifically designed for the
medical domain, demonstrated overwhelming superiority,
achieving the highest scores across all five benchmarks. Its
outperformance is attributable to a meticulously designed
evaluation and training framework that spans multiple
medical tasks. Through instruction fine-tuning, the model
has learned to align visual information with specific medical
instructions and knowledge. It does not merely recognize
content within an image; it learns to interpret the image in
the context of a specific question, providing answers that
are consistent with medical logic. This represents a crucial
leap from perception to cognition. The significantly lower
accuracy of all models on the PathVQA dataset compared to
human experts reveals the limitations of current AI in highly
specialized cognitive tasks. PathVQA’s focus on pathology
images requires an exceptionally detailed and professional
understanding of cellular morphology, tissue architecture,
and staining characteristics [273]. This level of depth and
nuance is difficult for general-purpose or even general
medical models to achieve . To answer such questions, a
model must establish a tight connection between fine-grained
visual features and abstract medical concepts [3]. Human
experts develop this robust cognitive link through years of
dedicated training, a process that is exceedingly difficult to
replicate for a model learning from a limited dataset [274].
Therefore, a critical challenge for current large models is to
enhance their knowledge integration and cognitive reasoning
capabilities within specialized professional domains [273].
This represents the most formidable step in transitioning
from current perceptual intelligence to a truly human-like
cognitive intelligence.
4.3
Diagram Understanding
Diagram understanding poses unique challenges for mul-
timodal models that extend beyond conventional visual
perception. This task requires models to integrate visual
ChartBench
Q: According to this chart, 
the Retention Rate of App 
Y at Month 5 is 76.00.
A: Yes
TextVQA
Q: what usernames 
are on the board?
A: rlfrick、sxswi、
abhinenmams
Q: What is the first 
data in orange line?
A: 41
ChartQA
Fig. 12. Examples from the ChartQA, TextQA, and ChartBench Datasets.
perception, text comprehension, and numerical logical rea-
soning to extract and infer abstract data from structured
visual information. Existing general-purpose multimodal
benchmarks, such as the comprehensive evaluation standards
of MMBench [280], MME [281], MM-Star [282], and MM-Vet
[283], often lack in-depth assessment of such capabilities.
To better evaluate this ability, a specialized task bench-
mark for chart question answering was introduced: ChartQA
[284]. Its construction combines two methodologies. One
portion of the questions is formulated by human experts
based on charts, ensuring the naturalness and complexity
of the problems. The other portion is generated through
semi-automated templates, which significantly expands the
dataset’s scale and coverage. The human-annotated subset,
ChartQA-Human [284], serves as the test set to determine if
a model has genuinely acquired human-like chart interpreta-
tion skills.
However, a limitation of ChartQA is that many of its
charts are accompanied by underlying structured data tables,
which allows models to potentially exploit a shortcut to
answer questions [285]. Prior to ChartQA, PlotQA [286]
represented an early attempt to construct a large-scale chart
question-answering benchmark, but its heavy reliance on
synthetic charts limited its ability to capture the complexity
of real-world scenarios. To resolve the ”tabular shortcut”
problem, the subsequent ChartBench [287] was developed by
removing all tabular data. This change compels models to rea-
son exclusively from visual elements, such as bar heights and
line slopes, in a manner akin to human interpretation [288].
The development in this area is built upon a series of founda-
tional works, evolving from early scene text recognition (e.g.,
TextVQA [289]) and document understanding (e.g., DocVQA
[290]) toward more sophisticated evaluation paradigms.
For example, ChartMind [291] extends the evaluation to
more complex real-world scenarios, proposing open-ended
tasks like trend analysis and data insight summarization.
Meanwhile, ChartMimic [292] introduces a more challenging
generative task, requiring the model to generate code that
can reproduce a chart based on an example image and
instructions. In Fig. 12, we provide examples from ChartQA,
TextQA, and ChartBench to highlight the distinctions among
the datasets.
In Table 8, we summarize the performance of a range
of leading open-source and proprietary large models on
six mainstream diagram understanding benchmarks. These
tasks go beyond basic visual perception and impose rigorous
demands on the models’ cognitive reasoning abilities, includ-
ing chart parsing, data extraction, spatial relationship under-
standing, and mathematical computation. The data reveal

===== PAGE 19 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
19
TABLE 8
Performance comparison on diagram understanding benchmarks. The
best-performing model’s scores are highlighted in bold.
Models
ChartQA
(Acc ↑)
PlotQA
(Acc ↑)
InfographicVQA
(Acc ↑)
DocVQA
(Acc ↑)
TextVQA
(Acc ↑)
TabMWP
(Acc ↑)
Proprietary Models
Gemini 1.5 Pro
87.2
73.1
81.0
93.1
78.7
96.9
GPT-4o
84.1
74.5
60.1
91.5
82.3
97.4
GPT-4V
78.4
68.9
55.2
88.6
78.3
95.3
Claude 3 Opus [296]
82.5
72.8
57.5
90.2
80.7
96.5
Qwen-VL-Max
79.8
69.3
-
93.1
79.5
95.8
Open-Source Models
InternVL-Chat-V1.5 (34B) [297]
83.8
71.5
54.3
88.5
78.9
-
InternVL-Chat-V1.5 (8B) [297]
79.1
68.2
51.2
85.1
75.6
-
Qwen2.5-VL (72B)
89.5
-
-
96.4
-
-
Qwen2.5-VL (7B) [23]
87.3
-
-
95.7
84.9
-
Qwen-VL-Chat (9B)
75.8
65.4
-
83.5
74.3
92.1
Qwen-VL-Chat (1.8B)
68.2
59.7
-
78.9
69.1
85.6
LLaVA-NeXT (34B) [298]
77.2
66.8
51.5
84.8
76.5
91.2
LLaVA-NeXT (7B) [298]
73.5
62.1
48.3
81.2
72.8
88.4
DeepSeek-VL (7B) [299]
76.3
66.1
-
84.1
75.0
-
that proprietary models, led by GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro,
demonstrate powerful and well-balanced comprehensive
capabilities, setting high performance benchmarks across
most tasks. Notably, GPT-4o leads on the TabMWP [293]
task, which emphasizes mathematical and logical reasoning,
with an accuracy of 97.4%, a strength attributed to its
powerful general-purpose reasoning abilities. Concurrently,
Gemini 1.5 Pro performs best on InfographicVQA [294],
which requires parsing complex and unstructured layouts,
underscoring its advantages in processing information-dense
visual content. This feature is closely linked to its Mixture-
of-Experts architecture, which can process vast contexts.
Among open-source models, Qwen2.5-VL (72B) achieves
the highest accuracy on two key benchmarks, ChartQA
and DocVQA, where its performance surpasses not only
all other open-source models but also the top proprietary
models. This model employs a native dynamic-resolution
Vision Transformer and advanced omni-document parsing
techniques. This allows it to process high-resolution inputs
without downsampling, enabling it to accurately capture and
understand fine-grained text, layout structures, and spatial
relationships within diagrams, thus achieving a profound
leap from perception to cognition.
Overall, models in the domain of diagram understanding
are evolving from ’information processors’ to ’cognitive
agents’ [295]. They are capable not only of understanding
visual content but also of reasoning, planning, and executing
complex tasks that interact with the digital world based on
that content. Future models will be expected not only to
”understand” diagrams but also to perform deep reasoning,
dynamic interaction, and cross-domain knowledge integra-
tion based on them, which will allow them to play a central
role in a broader range of real-world applications.
4.4
Video Understanding
Video understanding extends visual-textual reasoning from
static images to dynamic sequences, introducing complex
dimensions such as time, variation, and causality [300]. This
requires a model not only to recognize content but also
to elucidate the underlying reasoning logic. Early research
established a foundation for explainability on static images
through benchmarks like VQA-E [301] and introduced
the ”Visual Chain of Thought” (Visual CoT) methodology.
However, the dynamic nature of video necessitates more
complex, graph-structured reasoning capabilities.
To address the causal complexity inherent in video,
researchers have constructed specialized benchmarks. Rep-
resentative works include CausalVQA [302], which deeply
investigates causal relationships through five distinct ques-
tion types: descriptive, counterfactual, and predictive, among
others. Another is VCRBench [303], which requires models to
reorder shuffled video clips into a logical sequence, directly
testing their ability to model long-range causal dependencies.
Building on this, CausalStep [304] enhances the rigor of
evaluation by compelling models to perform step-wise
reasoning. However, the powerful generative capabilities
of modern models are accompanied by the problem of
”hallucinations” in the video domain. Consequently, a series
of specialized diagnostic benchmarks has emerged. Vid-
Halluc [305] focuses on evaluating temporal hallucinations,
while HAVEN [306] and VideoHallucer [307] provide more
comprehensive frameworks for assessing and mitigating both
intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations in video understanding.
Additionally, specialized benchmarks such as AVHBench
[308] for audio-visual content and Hallu-PI [309] for handling
input perturbations have been developed.
We have summarized the performance of various open-
source and proprietary large models on several cutting-edge
video understanding benchmarks, as shown in Table 9. The
results show that open-source models demonstrate excep-
tional performance on specific high-difficulty benchmarks,
whereas the evaluation data for proprietary models are
often sparse and opaque. Furthermore, a significant gap
persists between all models and human performance on
complex cognitive reasoning tasks. Among proprietary mod-
els, Gemini 1.5 Pro, with its massive context window sup-
porting up to ten million tokens and its Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) architecture, exhibits near-perfect performance in long-
video question answering and key information retrieval.
Among open-source models, Qwen-2.5-VL and STORM each
excel in different areas, with their superior performance
demonstrated on benchmarks designed for distinct cognitive
dimensions. The MLVU [310] benchmark, which focuses on
long-video understanding with an average video duration of
15 minutes, includes diverse genres like movies and vlogs to
evaluate a model’s integrated ability to process both holistic
information and local details. Qwen-2.5-VL stands out on this
benchmark due to its unique architectural innovations. The
model employs an ”Absolute Time Encoding” technique that
directly aligns the IDs of its Multimodal Rotational Position
Encoding (MRoPE) with video timestamps. This enables
second-level precision for event localization without intro-
ducing additional computational layers, a crucial feature for
identifying specific details in extended videos. On the other
hand, the MVBench [311] benchmark is specifically designed
to evaluate temporal reasoning, comprising 20 dynamic
tasks that cannot be solved with single-frame analysis, thus
testing a model’s temporal skills from perception to cognition,
Fig. 13 further illustrates examples of key task categories,
such as ’Action Antonym’, ’Action Localization’, and ’Scene
Transition’. . STORM achieves leading performance on this
benchmark, with its core advantage lying in its novel architec-

===== PAGE 20 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
20
Question: Which one of these descriptions 
correctly matches the actions in the video?
Choices: "Not sure.", "Scattering 
something down.", "Piling something up."
Answer: Piling something up
Question: Which choice matches the 
scene changes in the video?
Choices: "From office to home.", "From 
kitchen to garden.", "From beach to 
mountains.", "From spaceship to Earth."
Answer: From spaceship to Earth.
Question: When in the video sequence do 
we observe the action 'person open a box'?
Choices: "Throughout the entire video.", 
"At the end of the video.", "At the 
beginning of the video.", "In the middle of 
the video."
Answer: At the end of the video.
Fig. 13. Examples of Key Tasks for Evaluating Video Understanding:
Action Antonym, Action Localization, and Scene Transition.
ture [312]. It integrates a dedicated temporal encoder, based
on a Mamba state-space model, between the image encoder
and the large language model. This module explicitly models
inter-frame dynamic relationships, effectively preserving
critical temporal information throughout the video sequence.
This allows it to accurately capture and reason about complex
temporal variations, perfectly aligning with the evaluation
focus of MVBench.In parallel, VideoMME [313] serves as a
large-scale, multi-dimensional evaluation for video under-
standing. Although it primarily focuses on general-purpose
tasks, its cross-modal question answering and fine-grained
description components also involve challenges related to
causality and hallucination. Consequently, it is often used in
practice as a key supplementary benchmark for assessing a
model’s overall robustness and trustworthiness.
The primary challenges currently facing the field of video
understanding are the fragmentation and opacity of its
evaluation ecosystem. Models are often tested on disparate
benchmarks, making fair comparisons difficult. Concurrently,
issues of data contamination and ”shortcut” learning are
prevalent, leading to inflated performance scores. Future
research must shift from processing clean, curated data to
handling real-world noise and from closed-ended question
answering to open-ended problems that require knowledge
integration. This necessitates an urgent, collaborative effort
from the academic community to construct a unified, trans-
parent evaluation framework capable of measuring high-
level cognitive abilities.
4.5
Sentiment Analysis
Although current multimodal large models can readily
identify static facial expressions, a substantial gap remains
in their ability to comprehend the complex world of human
social and emotional dynamics. Existing benchmarks for
knowledge retrieval, such as Infoseek [318], or for factual
reasoning, like VQA, are not relevant to sentiment analysis.
Meanwhile, commonsense reasoning benchmarks, such as
SocialIQA [319], are predominantly text-based and lack
the authentic interactivity of multimodal social scenarios
[320]. Evaluating a model’s ”Emotional Quotient” (EQ)
requires moving beyond simple expression classification and
into the realm of dynamic, multi-party, and realistic social
interactions.
To advance and test the ”EQ” of models, researchers have
proposed a range of specialized benchmarks. The milestone
TABLE 9
Performance comparison on video understanding benchmarks. The
best-performing model’s scores are highlighted in bold.
Models
CausalVQA
(Acc ↑)
VCRBench
(Acc ↑)
MLVU
(M-Avg ↑)
MVBench
(Score ↑)
Video-MME
(w/o subs)
Human
84.8
96.4
-
-
-
Proprietary Models
Gemini 1.5 Pro
-
48.2
-
-
75.0
GPT-4o
51.0
29.0
54.9
64.6
71.9
Open-Source Models
STORM [314]
-
-
72.9
70.6
-
InternVL2.5 (78B) [315]
47.5
14.5
59.9
-
-
Qwen2.5-VL (72B)
-
29.0
74.6
70.4
73.3
Qwen2.5-VL (7B)
49.1
7.1
70.2
69.6
65.1
LLaVA-Video-72B [316]
-
5.2
-
64.1
-
Video-LLaVA (7B) [317]
-
-
47.3
58.6
-
Monica
Phoebe
1) Phoebe! Come on! Let's 
go!  Come on! Why aren't 
you dressed yet?!
2) I'm sorry, but I just 
wrote the best dance 
song for your wedding. 
Check this out.
3) No, Phoebe, I'll tell you what, 
if you get ready now I'll let you 
play it at the wedding.
4) Really?!
5) Oh that's so 
exciting!Thank
s Mon!
6) Oh but Mon, if you 
touch my guitar again 
I'll have to pound on 
you for a little bit.
7) Fair enough, now go 
get ready!
Negative
Neutral
Neutarl
Neutral
Positive
Positive
Negative
Fig. 14. An Illustrative Sentiment Analysis Example from the MELD
Dataset (Derived from the TV show Friends).
MELD dataset, derived from the American television series
Friends, utilizes multi-party dialogue videos to evaluate a
model’s understanding of context, character interactions, and
emotional dynamics, Fig. 14 shows a dialogue scene. Subse-
quent benchmarks have focused on more nuanced cognitive
challenges. For example, CA-MER [321] concentrates on
scenes of emotional conflict, such as a character smiling while
expressing sad sentiments, to test a model’s reasoning capa-
bilities in situations of cognitive dissonance. Building on this,
HumanVBench [322] systematically evaluates the alignment
between internal emotions and external expressions, while
HumaniBench [323] is the first benchmark designed around
human-centric AI principles like fairness and empathy. To
probe deeper levels of social cognition, Social-IQ [324]
assesses the understanding of social dynamics, and GD-
VCR [325] and CVQA [326] are dedicated to addressing the
problem of cultural bias. The trend in this field is shifting
from classification toward more fine-grained tasks such as
tracking, with benchmarks like VEATIC [327], and generative
understanding, as seen in MER-UniBench [328]. Additionally,
other benchmarks include MTMEUR [329], which focuses
on multi-turn dialogue reasoning; Multi-HM [330], designed
for specific scenarios; and the MERR Dataset [331], which
provides large-scale data for training emotion recognition
and reasoning.
We have summarized the performance of various models
on multimodal sentiment analysis benchmarks. As shown
in Table 10, the proprietary model Gemini 2.5 Pro achieved
a leading score on the MME-EMOTION [334], leveraging
its built-in ”thinking” mechanism. However, its success
rate is not as high as in other domains. Furthermore, the
evaluation data for two key benchmarks, MELD [335] and
HumanVBench, are extremely sparse [336]. Only a few

===== PAGE 21 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
21
TABLE 10
Performance comparison on sentiment analysis benchmarks. The
best-performing model’s scores are highlighted in bold.
Models
MME-EMOTION
(Rec ↑)
MELD
(WF1 ↑)
HumanVBench
(Avg Emo. Perc. ↑)
Proprietary Models
Gemini 2.5 Pro
39.3
-
-
Gemini 1.5 Pro
32.8
-
-
GPT-4o
37.8
-
-
Open-Source General Purpose Models
InternVL 2.5 (20B) [315]
29.2
45.0
-
InternVL-Chat-V1.5 (26B) [297]
20.8
-
36.0
LLaVA-OneVision (72B)
37.9
-
-
Qwen2.5-VL (72B)
31.3
39.1
25.8
Qwen2.5-VL (7B)
28.4
-
-
Qwen2-VL (7B) [332]
31.1
-
35.4
VideoLLaMA2 (7B) [333]
29.8
32.7
25.8
open-source models, including InternVL, Qwen, and VideoL-
LaMA2, have reported results, while no data are available for
any proprietary models or most other open-source models.
This comparison highlights a systemic evaluation dilemma
within the field. Because proprietary model developers tend
to release results on their own comprehensive, private bench-
marks, a global performance comparison deficit is created
[337]. This makes it difficult for researchers to fairly and
comprehensively assess the capabilities of different models
on specific cognitive dimensions under a unified standard.
This data gap is particularly pronounced between the open-
source and proprietary ecosystems, and it represents a
formidable obstacle to measuring the field’s true progress
from perceptual intelligence toward cognitive intelligence.
5
FUTURE DIRECTION
In response to the present challenges, some future research
directions can be inferred to build the next generation of
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) capable of
truly bridging the gap from perception to cognition.
5.1
Unified Vision Encoder
Despite rapid progress, current visual encoders of MLLMs
often fail to comprehensively capture task-relevant visual
information, leaving the evidence available to language
reasoning incomplete. Building on this observation, recent
work explores unified visual encoders that provide multi-
granular, more comprehensive representations, integrating
understanding and generation as well as multiple visual
modalities within a single framework. For example, ATO-
KEN [338] encodes images, videos, and 3D assets to into
a shared latent space, aiming to unifying both tasks and
modalities in a single framework. By fusing CLIP-level
semantics with unified autoregressive training, TokLIP [339]
equips visual tokens with high-level semantic understanding
and enhances their low-level generative fidelity. However,
this unification remains incomplete: a persistent gap sepa-
rates understanding and generation, and a true integration
across visual modalities has yet to be achieved. Therefore,
developing a truly unified, multi-granular visual encoder,
with strong alignment and efficiency, remains a valuable
direction for future work.
5.2
Latent Reasoning
Recently, a line of research has emerged to explore direct
intervention within the latent space to guide the reasoning
process of vision-language models. Different from traditional
approaches that operate on input or output layers, these
methods act directly on the model’s latent representations,
enabling more flexible and fine-grained control. Several key
strategies exemplify this approach. For example, Multimodal
Chain of Continuous Thought [340] introduces a method
for continuous reasoning by iterating on “thought vectors”
within the latent space, which enhances the alignment and
fusion of cross-modal information. Concurrently, VTI [341]
stabilizes visual and textual features to alleviate hallucina-
tions by injecting corrective directions during the inference
stage. Similarly, jiang et al. [342] leverages orthogonalization
to directly nullify directions in the latent space associated
with spurious concepts.
The synthesis of these distinct approaches presents a
promising path for future work: exploring how to simulta-
neously achieve continuous reasoning, enhanced robustness,
and hallucination suppression. The ultimate goal is to
construct multimodal reasoning frameworks that are signifi-
cantly more controllable and interpretable. The ultimate goal
is to construct multimodal reasoning frameworks that are
significantly more controllable and interpretable. By directly
shaping the model’s internal cognitive processes, this line of
research promises to build a more robust bridge between raw
visual perception and reasoned linguistic output, fostering
a more grounded and coherent understanding of the visual
world for more reliable interactive reasoning.
5.3
Generative Reasoning
This paradigm externalizes the model’s implicit reasoning
process into explicit visual entities as perception input for
subsequent steps, proving highly valuable in domains such
as robotic planning, visual puzzle solving, and dynamic
simulations. Works like Chameleon [343] provide the foun-
dational architecture for this paradigm by achieving mixed-
modal understanding and generation of text and images,
allowing for interleaved output in any sequence. Subsequent
research, such as Visual Planning [344] aims to ground
the planning and reasoning processes in visual domain.
More Recently methods like MVoT [345], Mind’s Eye of
LLMs [346] and ViLaSR [347] prompt the model to generate
and iteratively update visual scratchpads when solving
complex problems, and then use these visual ”thought traces”
to drive subsequent reasoning.
However, despite these methods have prospective future,
they still face some challenges: The generated intermediate
images can be inaccurate or contain hallucinations, failing
to match the original source. And more importantly, the
curation of suitable training data presents a significant
challenge. To address these issues, future research can explore
how to enhancing the generation quality and how to reduce
the dependency on manually curated datasets.

===== PAGE 22 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
22
5.4
Tool-Augmented Reasoning
As we discuss in Sec. 3.4.2, representative works such as
PixelReasoner [151], and OpenThinkimg [198] demonstrate
significant advancements in both training paradigms and
the richness of the tool ecosystem. However, there still exist
some problems:
• There is often a consistency gap between visual cues and
the reasoning process, leading to ungrounded conclusions.
While methods like GThinker [348] introduce verification
steps to check visual cues during reasoning, this often
comes at the cost of increased inference time, creating an
efficiency-accuracy trade-off.
• Current models often generate linear reasoning paths,
which limits their ability to solve complex, multi-step
problems that require deeper problem composition or
exploration of multiple possibilities.
To address these problems, future research can focus on
optimizing both the structure of the reasoning path and the
timing of tool use. To create more sophisticated reasoning
trajectories, tree-based algorithms like MCTS [128] can be
explored. Simultaneously, the challenge of when to use a
tool can be addressed by designing adaptive mechanisms.
Such mechanisms should aim to ensure the correctness and
consistency of visual cues while balancing the trade-off
between verification accuracy and inference speed.
5.5
Cross-Image Relation Reasoning
Cross-image relation reasoning refers to the advanced capa-
bility of reasoning across multiple images. This requires a
model to comprehend the logical or sequential relationships
between events depicted in a series of images in order
to draw a final conclusion. However, the vast majority of
methods [94], [95], [180] discussed in this survey concentrate
on single-image reasoning. Only a few works focus on
the multi-image problems. For instance, CmmCoT [181]
incorporates a memory bank to retrieve relevant informa-
tion from associated images during inference time. Focus-
Centric Visual Chain [349] explicitly models the inter-image
relationships, while Mantis [350] introduces an interleaved
instruction tuning. These works point out an open question
for the future:how to reduce memory loss of image evidence
at inference time and enable more flexible mining of inter-
image relationships? Addressing this question is a critical
step toward endowing MLLMs with a form of contextual
memory, allowing them to perceive and reason about the
world as a continuous stream of interconnected events rather
than a series of isolated snapshots.
5.6
Real-Word Cognitive Evaluation
A major limitation of current evaluation systems is their
reliance on clean data and closed-ended question-answering
formats, which creates a significant gap between them and
the dynamic real world, as well as advanced human cognitive
activities. On the one hand, existing benchmarks are mostly
built on rigorously cleaned and precisely annotated data,
whereas real-world environments are filled with multi-source
interference such as visual occlusions, background noise,
and lighting variations. On the other hand, current tasks
generally remain at the perceptual level and fail to adequately
address higher-level cognitive reasoning. For instance, even
in the high-stakes application of medical diagnosis, models
still perform significantly worse than human experts on the
PathVQA [263] benchmark.
Therefore, future cognitive evaluation must pivot from
closed environments to the complex challenges of the real
world. The benchmarks must transcend basic perception
to focus on higher-order cognitive reasoning. For instance,
benchmarks like CA-MER [321], which assesses reasoning
in emotionally conflicting scenarios, and CausalVQA [302],
which systematically tests causal understanding, are de-
signed to compel models to move beyond mere “perception”
toward genuine “reasoning”. Furthermore, task formats
must involve open-ended knowledge integration and
creation. The evaluation emphasis should be on generating
logically coherent explanations or executable code, rather
than selecting a single correct answer. A forward-looking
example is ChartMimic [292], which requires models to use
visual, logical, and programming skills to reproduce a chart.
6
CONCLUSION
In this survey, we systematically track and summarize the
evolution of vision–language interactive reasoning in Mul-
timodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) under a unified
From Perception to Cognition framework. To the best of our
knowledge, this review offers one of the most comprehensive
overviews of how fine-grained Perception underpins robust
Cognition. Specifically, we first outline the developmental
history of vision–language interaction and present essential
background, including core concepts, representative architec-
tures, and evaluation protocols. We then organize the field
around two layers: On the Perception side, we synthesize
advances in visual encoders, resolution handling, and task-
aware vision–language alignment. On the Cognition side ,
we examine training paradigms for problem decomposition,
preference optimization, and dynamic reasoning loops that
re-inspect visual evidence. We also catalog benchmarks and
applications across documents, charts, scientific reasoning,
and healthcare, compile the relevant datasets, and offer
fair, comparable analyses where feasible. Finally, we outline
concrete future directions: building a truly unified, multi-
granular visual encoder, developing latent-space reasoning
that plans and searches over internal representations, advanc-
ing cross-image relational reasoning and integrating tool-
augmented interaction. We also highlight the overarching
challenge of closing the perception–cognition gap. This
survey aims to serve both newcomers and experienced
researchers as a structured, up-to-date reference on current
progress and a guide for future work in vision–language
interactive reasoning.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Pei, L. Deng, S. Song, M. Zhao, Y. Zhang, S. Wu, G. Wang,
Z. Zou, Z. Wu, W. He et al., “Towards artificial general intelligence
with hybrid tianjic chip architecture,” Nature, vol. 572, no. 7767,
pp. 106–111, 2019. 1
[2]
S. Bubeck, V. Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke, E. Horvitz,
E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y. T. Lee, Y. Li, S. Lundberg et al., “Sparks of
artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. 1

===== PAGE 23 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
23
[3]
N. Fei, Z. Lu, Y. Gao, G. Yang, Y. Huo, J. Wen, H. Lu, R. Song,
X. Gao, T. Xiang et al., “Towards artificial general intelligence via
a multimodal foundation model,” Nature Communications, vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 3094, 2022. 1, 18
[4]
J. N. Wood, “Artificial intelligence tackles the nature–nurture
debate,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 381–382, 2024.
1
[5]
J. Y. Lee, S. Lee, A. Mishra, X. Yan, B. McMahan, B. Gaisford,
C. Kobashigawa, M. Qu, C. Xie, and J. C. Kao, “Brain–computer
interface control with artificial intelligence copilots,” Nature
Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–14, 2025. 1
[6]
J. Xiong, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Shi, M. Xu, M. Li,
Z. Fu, X. Kong, Y. Wang et al., “Bridging chemistry and artificial
intelligence by a reaction description language,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, pp. 1–12, 2025. 1
[7]
S. Hu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Fu, J. Zhu, H. Yu, and C. Yang, “Trans-
parent artificial intelligence-enabled interpretable and interactive
sleep apnea assessment across flexible monitoring scenarios,”
Nature Communications, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 7548, 2025. 1
[8]
S. Tayebi Arasteh, T. Han, M. Lotfinia, C. Kuhl, J. N. Kather,
D. Truhn, and S. Nebelung, “Large language models streamline
automated machine learning for clinical studies,” Nature Commu-
nications, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 1603, 2024. 1
[9]
E. Kasneci, K. Seßler, S. K¨uchemann, M. Bannert, D. Dementieva,
F. Fischer, U. Gasser, G. Groh, S. G¨unnemann, E. H¨ullermeier
et al., “Chatgpt for good? on opportunities and challenges of large
language models for education,” Learning and individual differences,
vol. 103, p. 102274, 2023. 1
[10]
W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min,
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong et al., “A survey of large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223, vol. 1, no. 2, 2023. 1
[11]
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agar-
wal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark et al., “Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision,”
in International conference on machine learning.
PmLR, 2021, pp.
8748–8763. 1, 4, 5
[12]
O. Sim´eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose,
V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa et al., “Dinov3,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104, 2025. 1, 5
[13]
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhari-
wal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Lan-
guage models are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020. 1
[14]
J. Zhang, J. Huang, S. Jin, and S. Lu, “Vision-language models for
vision tasks: A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5625–5644, 2024. 1
[15]
Q. Ye, Z. Yu, R. Shao, Y. Cui, X. Kang, X. Liu, P. Torr, and X. Cao,
“Cat+: Investigating and enhancing audio-visual understanding in
large language models,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 8674–8690, 2025. 1, 2
[16]
J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson,
K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds et al., “Flamingo: a
visual language model for few-shot learning,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 23 716–23 736, 2022. 1, 8
[17]
H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 36, pp. 34 892–
34 916, 2023. 1, 4, 8
[18]
I. Augenstein, T. Baldwin, M. Cha, T. Chakraborty, G. L.
Ciampaglia, D. Corney, R. DiResta, E. Ferrara, S. Hale, A. Halevy
et al., “Factuality challenges in the era of large language models
and opportunities for fact-checking,” Nature Machine Intelligence,
vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 852–863, 2024. 1
[19]
Y. Ma, L. Jiao, F. Liu, L. Li, W. Ma, S. Yang, X. Liu, and P. Chen,
“Unveiling and mitigating generalized biases of dnns through the
intrinsic dimensions of perceptual manifolds,” IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024. 1
[20]
M. Griot, C. Hemptinne, J. Vanderdonckt, and D. Yuksel, “Large
language models lack essential metacognition for reliable medical
reasoning,” Nature communications, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 642, 2025. 1
[21]
J. Chen, Y. Ma, A. Zhang, W. Tang, W. Dai, and B. Liu, “Com-
positional attribute imbalance in vision datasets,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.14418, 2025. 1
[22]
Y. Xu, L. Hu, J. Zhao, Z. Qiu, K. Xu, Y. Ye, and H. Gu, “A survey
on multilingual large language models: Corpora, alignment, and
bias,” Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 19, no. 11, p. 1911362, 2025.
1
[23]
S. Bai, K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge, S. Song, K. Dang, P. Wang,
S. Wang, J. Tang et al., “Qwen2. 5-vl technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.13923, 2025. 1, 17, 19
[24]
Z. Chen, W. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Z. Gao, E. Cui, J. Zhu, S. Ye,
H. Tian, Z. Liu et al., “Expanding performance boundaries of
open-source multimodal models with model, data, and test-time
scaling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05271, 2024. 1
[25]
A. Hurst, A. Lerer, A. P. Goucher, A. Perelman, A. Ramesh,
A. Clark, A. Ostrow, A. Welihinda, A. Hayes, A. Radford et al.,
“Gpt-4o system card,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024. 1, 17
[26]
A. T. Kalai, O. Nachum, S. S. Vempala, and E. Zhang, “Why
language models hallucinate,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04664,
2025. 1
[27]
S. Tong, Z. Liu, Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, Y. LeCun, and S. Xie, “Eyes wide
shut? exploring the visual shortcomings of multimodal llms,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 9568–9578. 2, 5, 6
[28]
S. Yin, C. Fu, S. Zhao, K. Li, X. Sun, T. Xu, and E. Chen, “A survey
on multimodal large language models,” National Science Review,
vol. 11, no. 12, p. nwae403, 2024. 3
[29]
Z.-Z. Li, D. Zhang, M.-L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Yao, H. Xu,
J. Zheng, P.-J. Wang, X. Chen et al., “From system 1 to system
2: A survey of reasoning large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.17419, 2025. 3
[30]
Y. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, S. Yan, Z. Liu, J. Luo, and H. Fei, “Mul-
timodal chain-of-thought reasoning: A comprehensive survey,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12605, 2025. 3
[31]
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Xu, X. Chen, H. Shi, S. Jiang,
X. Wang, J. Wang et al., “Perception, reason, think, and plan: A
survey on large multimodal reasoning models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.04921, 2025. 3
[32]
F. Ke, J. Hsu, Z. Cai, Z. Ma, X. Zheng, X. Wu, S. Huang, W. Wang,
P. D. Haghighi, G. Haffari et al., “Explain before you answer:
A survey on compositional visual reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.17298, 2025. 3
[33]
Z. Su, P. Xia, H. Guo, Z. Liu, Y. Ma, X. Qu, J. Liu, Y. Li,
K. Zeng, Z. Yang et al., “Thinking with images for multimodal
reasoning: Foundations, methods, and future frontiers,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.23918, 2025. 3, 13
[34]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning
for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778. 4
[35]
A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly
et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. 4
[36]
Z. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Wang, X. Yin, D. Florencio, L. Wang, C. Zhang,
L. Zhang, and J. Luo, “Tap: Text-aware pre-training for text-vqa
and text-caption,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 8751–8761. 4
[37]
H. Xia, R. Lan, H. Li, and S. Song, “St-vqa: shrinkage transformer
with accurate alignment for visual question answering,” Applied
Intelligence, vol. 53, no. 18, pp. 20 967–20 978, 2023. 4
[38]
O. Sidorov, R. Hu, M. Rohrbach, and A. Singh, “Textcaps: a dataset
for image captioning with reading comprehension,” in European
conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2020, pp. 742–758. 4
[39]
R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz,
S. Chen, Y. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D. A. Shamma et al., “Visual genome:
Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image
annotations,” International journal of computer vision, vol. 123, no. 1,
pp. 32–73, 2017. 4
[40]
N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and
S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in
European conference on computer vision. Springer, 2020, pp. 213–229.
4
[41]
J. Kuang, Y. Shen, J. Xie, H. Luo, Z. Xu, R. Li, Y. Li, X. Cheng, X. Lin,
and Y. Han, “Natural language understanding and inference with
mllm in visual question answering: A survey,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1–36, 2025. 4
[42]
H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, and Y. J. Lee, “Improved baselines with visual
instruction tuning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 26 296–26 306. 4
[43]
Q. Sun, Y. Fang, L. Wu, X. Wang, and Y. Cao, “Eva-clip: Im-
proved training techniques for clip at scale,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.15389, 2023. 5, 6
[44]
X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer, “Sigmoid loss
for language image pre-training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF

===== PAGE 24 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
24
international conference on computer vision, 2023, pp. 11 975–11 986.
5, 6
[45]
H. Xu, S. Xie, X. E. Tan, P.-Y. Huang, R. Howes, V. Sharma, S.-W.
Li, G. Ghosh, L. Zettlemoyer, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Demystifying
clip data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16671, 2023. 5, 6
[46]
M. Oquab, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, H. Vo, M. Szafraniec,
V. Khalidov, P. Fernandez, D. Haziza, F. Massa, A. El-Nouby et al.,
“Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023. 5, 6
[47]
W. Wang, Q. Sun, F. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Liu, and X. Wang, “Diffusion
feedback helps clip see better,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.20171,
2024. 5, 6
[48]
T. Zhang, Y. Li, Y.-c. Chou, J. Chen, A. Yuille, C. Wei, and
J. Xiao, “Vision-language-vision auto-encoder: Scalable knowledge
distillation from diffusion models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07104,
2025. 5, 6
[49]
S. Karamcheti, S. Nair, A. Balakrishna, P. Liang, T. Kollar, and
D. Sadigh, “Prismatic vlms: Investigating the design space of
visually-conditioned language models,” in Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 5, 6
[50]
H. Zhang, H. You, P. Dufter, B. Zhang, C. Chen, H.-Y. Chen, T.-J.
Fu, W. Y. Wang, S.-F. Chang, Z. Gan et al., “Ferret-v2: An improved
baseline for referring and grounding with large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07973, 2024. 5, 6
[51]
X. Fan, T. Ji, S. Li, S. Jin, S. Song, J. Wang, B. Hong, L. Chen,
G. Zheng, M. Zhang et al., “Poly-visual-expert vision-language
models,” in First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. 5, 6
[52]
O. F. Kar, A. Tonioni, P. Poklukar, A. Kulshrestha, A. Zamir, and
F. Tombari, “Brave: Broadening the visual encoding of vision-
language models,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 113–132. 5, 6
[53]
Z. Lin, C. Liu, R. Zhang, P. Gao, L. Qiu, H. Xiao, H. Qiu, C. Lin,
W. Shao, K. Chen et al., “Sphinx: The joint mixing of weights, tasks,
and visual embeddings for multi-modal large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07575, 2023. 5, 6
[54]
A.-L. Wang, B. Shan, W. Shi, K.-Y. Lin, X. Fei, G. Tang, L. Liao,
J. Tang, C. Huang, and W.-S. Zheng, “Pargo: Bridging vision-
language with partial and global views,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 7, 2025, pp.
7491–7499. 5, 6, 8
[55]
J. Lin, H. Chen, Y. Fan, Y. Fan, X. Jin, H. Su, J. Fu, and X. Shen,
“Multi-layer visual feature fusion in multimodal llms: Methods,
analysis, and best practices,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 4156–4166. 5, 6
[56]
L. Shen, G. Chen, R. Shao, W. Guan, and L. Nie, “Mome: Mixture
of multimodal experts for generalist multimodal large language
models,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 37,
pp. 42 048–42 070, 2024. 5, 6
[57]
Z. Zong, B. Ma, D. Shen, G. Song, H. Shao, D. Jiang, H. Li, and
Y. Liu, “Mova: Adapting mixture of vision experts to multimodal
context,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
pp. 103 305–103 333, 2024. 5, 6
[58]
W. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Pang, J. Zhang, P. Li, Q. Zhang,
and L. Gao, “Diving into mitigating hallucinations from a vision
perspective for large vision-language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.13836, 2025. 5, 6
[59]
Y. Wu, J. Du, K. Yan, S. Ding, and X. Li, “Tove: Efficient vision-
language learning via knowledge transfer from vision experts,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00691, 2025. 5, 6
[60]
Z. Li, Z. Li, and T. Zhou, “R2-t2: Re-routing in test-time for
multimodal mixture-of-experts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20395,
2025. 5, 6
[61]
M. Ranzinger, G. Heinrich, J. Kautz, and P. Molchanov, “Am-radio:
Agglomerative vision foundation model reduce all domains into
one,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 12 490–12 500. 6
[62]
M. B. Sariyildiz, P. Weinzaepfel, T. Lucas, D. Larlus, and Y. Kalan-
tidis, “Unic: Universal classification models via multi-teacher
distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05088, 2024. 6
[63]
J. Cao, Y. Zhang, T. Huang, M. Lu, Q. Zhang, R. An, N. Ma,
and S. Zhang, “Move-kd: Knowledge distillation for vlms with
mixture of visual encoders,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 19 846–19 856. 6
[64]
M. B. Sarıyıldız, P. Weinzaepfel, T. Lucas, P. de Jorge, D. Larlus,
and Y. Kalantidis, “Dune: Distilling a universal encoder from
heterogeneous 2d and 3d teachers,” in Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 30 084–30 094. 6
[65]
H. Zhang, F. Li, S. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Su, J. Zhu, L. M. Ni, and
H.-Y. Shum, “Dino: Detr with improved denoising anchor boxes
for end-to-end object detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03605,
2022. 5
[66]
G. Luo, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Sun, and R. Ji, “Feast
your eyes: Mixture-of-resolution adaptation for multimodal large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03003, 2024. 5
[67]
Y. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Zhong, Y. Chen, R. Chu, S. Liu, and
J. Jia, “Mini-gemini: Mining the potential of multi-modality vision
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18814, 2024. 5
[68]
Z. Chen, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Q. Gu, and Y. Li, “Towards understanding
the mixture-of-experts layer in deep learning,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 23 049–23 062, 2022. 5, 8
[69]
J. Cha, W. Kang, J. Mun, and B. Roh, “Honeybee: Locality-
enhanced projector for multimodal llm,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 13 817–13 827. 7, 8
[70]
X. Zhu, Y. Hu, F. Mo, M. Li, and J. Wu, “Uni-med: a unified
medical generalist foundation model for multi-task learning via
connector-moe,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 37, pp. 81 225–81 256, 2024. 7, 8
[71]
Z. Xu, B. Qu, Y. Qi, S. Du, C. Xu, C. Yuan, and J. Guo, “Chartmoe:
Mixture of diversely aligned expert connector for chart under-
standing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.03277, 2024. 7, 8
[72]
H. Li, J. Chen, Z. Wei, S. Huang, T. Hui, J. Gao, X. Wei, and S. Liu,
“Llava-st: A multimodal large language model for fine-grained
spatial-temporal understanding,” in Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 8592–8603. 7, 8
[73]
J. Zhao, B. Sun, X. Chen, X. Wei, and Q. Hou, “Llava-octopus:
Unlocking instruction-driven adaptive projector fusion for video
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05067, 2025. 7, 8
[74]
S. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Xia, Y. Hu, S. Zhao, Y. Ma, Z. Wei, Y. Li,
L. Duan, J. Zhao et al., “Ovis2. 5 technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.11737, 2025. 7, 8
[75]
F. Liu, F. Piccinno, S. Krichene, C. Pang, K. Lee, M. Joshi, Y. Altun,
N. Collier, and J. M. Eisenschlos, “Matcha: Enhancing visual
language pretraining with math reasoning and chart derendering,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09662, 2022. 7, 8
[76]
C. Li, C. Wong, S. Zhang, N. Usuyama, H. Liu, J. Yang, T. Nau-
mann, H. Poon, and J. Gao, “Llava-med: Training a large language-
and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 28 541–28 564,
2023. 7, 8, 18
[77]
H. Wu, Z. Zhang, E. Zhang, C. Chen, L. Liao, A. Wang, K. Xu,
C. Li, J. Hou, G. Zhai et al., “Q-instruct: Improving low-level visual
abilities for multi-modality foundation models,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2024, pp. 25 490–25 500. 7, 8
[78]
A. Masry, M. Shahmohammadi, M. R. Parvez, E. Hoque, and
S. Joty, “Chartinstruct: Instruction tuning for chart comprehension
and reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09028, 2024. 7, 8, 10
[79]
M. Jia, L. Tang, B.-C. Chen, C. Cardie, S. Belongie, B. Hariharan,
and S.-N. Lim, “Visual prompt tuning,” in European conference on
computer vision.
Springer, 2022, pp. 709–727. 7, 8
[80]
A. Zhang, H. Fei, Y. Yao, W. Ji, L. Li, Z. Liu, and T.-S. Chua,
“Vpgtrans: Transfer visual prompt generator across llms,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 20 299–20 319,
2023. 7, 8
[81]
Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, S. Zhang, T. Min, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “Exploring
the transferability of visual prompting for multimodal large
language models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 26 562–26 572. 7,
8
[82]
K. Chen, Z. Zhang, W. Zeng, R. Zhang, F. Zhu, and R. Zhao,
“Shikra: Unleashing multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195, 2023. 7, 8
[83]
H. Zhang, H. Li, F. Li, T. Ren, X. Zou, S. Liu, S. Huang,
J. Gao, Leizhang, C. Li et al., “Llava-grounding: Grounded visual
chat with large multimodal models,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 19–35. 7, 8
[84]
Z. Peng, W. Wang, L. Dong, Y. Hao, S. Huang, S. Ma, Q. Ye,
and F. Wei, “Grounding multimodal large language models to
the world,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024. 7, 8
[85]
H. Rasheed, M. Maaz, S. Shaji, A. Shaker, S. Khan, H. Cholakkal,
R. M. Anwer, E. Xing, M.-H. Yang, and F. S. Khan, “Glamm:
Pixel grounding large multimodal model,” in Proceedings of the

===== PAGE 25 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
25
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 13 009–13 018. 7, 8
[86]
M. Cai, H. Liu, S. K. Mustikovela, G. P. Meyer, Y. Chai, D. Park, and
Y. J. Lee, “Vip-llava: Making large multimodal models understand
arbitrary visual prompts,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 12 914–12 923.
7, 8
[87]
W. Lin et al., “Draw-and-understand: Leveraging visual prompts
to enable multimodal large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.20271, 2024. 7, 8
[88]
X. Lai, Z. Tian, Y. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Yuan, S. Liu, and J. Jia,
“Lisa: Reasoning segmentation via large language model,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 9579–9589. 7, 9
[89]
Z. Xia, D. Han, Y. Han, X. Pan, S. Song, and G. Huang, “Gsva:
Generalized segmentation via multimodal large language models,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 3858–3869. 7, 9
[90]
J. Wu, M. Zhong, S. Xing, Z. Lai, Z. Liu, Z. Chen, W. Wang, X. Zhu,
L. Lu, T. Lu, P. Luo, Y. Qiao, and J. Dai, “Visionllm v2: An end-to-
end generalist multimodal large language model for hundreds of
vision-language tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08394, 2024. 7, 9
[91]
H. Fei, S. Wu, H. Zhang, T.-S. Chua, and S. Yan, “Vitron: A unified
pixel-level vision llm for understanding, generating, segmenting,
editing,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 37,
pp. 57 207–57 239, 2024. 7, 9
[92]
D. Jang et al., “A large-scale benchmark dataset for multi-target
and multi-granularity reasoning segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.13881, 2025. 7, 9
[93]
L. Zhu, T. Chen, Q. Xu, X. Liu, D. Ji, H. Wu, D. W. Soh, and
J. Liu, “Popen: Preference-based optimization and ensemble for
lvlm-based reasoning segmentation,” in Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 30 231–30 240. 7,
9
[94]
P. Wu and S. Xie, “V*: Guided visual search as a core mechanism
in multimodal llms,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 13 084–13 094. 7,
9, 22
[95]
G. Li, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Peng, “Dyfo: A training-free dynamic
focus visual search for enhancing lmms in fine-grained visual
understanding,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 9098–9108. 7, 9, 22
[96]
G. Sun, M. Jin, Z. Wang, C.-L. Wang, S. Ma, Q. Wang, T. Geng,
Y. N. Wu, Y. Zhang, and D. Liu, “Visual agents as fast and slow
thinkers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08862, 2024. 7, 9
[97]
H. Taud and J.-F. Mas, “Multilayer perceptron (mlp),” in Geomatic
approaches for modeling land change scenarios.
Springer, 2017, pp.
451–455. 8
[98]
J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping
language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and
large language models,” in International conference on machine
learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 19 730–19 742. 8
[99]
W. Dai, J. Li, D. Li, A. Tiong, J. Zhao, W. Wang, B. Li, P. N.
Fung, and S. Hoi, “Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-
language models with instruction tuning,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 36, pp. 49 250–49 267, 2023. 8, 18
[100] S. Lu, Y. Li, Q.-G. Chen, Z. Xu, W. Luo, K. Zhang, and H.-J.
Ye, “Ovis: Structural embedding alignment for multimodal large
language model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20797, 2024. 8
[101] W. Shi, Z. Hu, Y. Bin, J. Liu, Y. Yang, S.-K. Ng, L. Bing, and R. K.-W.
Lee, “Math-llava: Bootstrapping mathematical reasoning for mul-
timodal large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17294,
2024. 8
[102] A. Masry, M. Thakkar, A. Bajaj, A. Kartha, E. Hoque, and S. Joty,
“Chartgemma: Visual instruction-tuning for chart reasoning in the
wild,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04172, 2024. 8, 9, 10
[103] Z. Ren, Z. Huang, Y. Wei, Y. Zhao, D. Fu, J. Feng, and X. Jin,
“Pixellm: Pixel reasoning with large multimodal model,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 26 374–26 383. 8
[104] H. Lightman, V. Kosaraju, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, B. Baker, T. Lee,
J. Leike, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and K. Cobbe, “Let’s verify
step by step,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023. 9, 10
[105] Z. Zhang, A. Zhang, M. Li, H. Zhao, G. Karypis, and A. Smola,
“Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning in language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00923, 2023. 9, 10, 14
[106] Y. Ma, Y. Cao, J. Sun, M. Pavone, and C. Xiao, “Dolphins:
Multimodal language model for driving,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 403–420. 9, 10
[107] H. Shao, S. Qian, H. Xiao, G. Song, Z. Zong, L. Wang, Y. Liu, and
H. Li, “Visual cot: Advancing multi-modal language models with
a comprehensive dataset and benchmark for chain-of-thought
reasoning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 37, pp. 8612–8642, 2024. 9, 10
[108] G. Xu, P. Jin, Z. Wu, H. Li, Y. Song, L. Sun, and L. Yuan, “Llava-cot:
Let vision language models reason step-by-step,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10440, 2024. 9, 10
[109] O. Thawakar, D. Dissanayake, K. More, R. Thawkar, A. Heakl,
N. Ahsan, Y. Li, M. Zumri, J. Lahoud, R. M. Anwer et al., “Llamav-
o1: Rethinking step-by-step visual reasoning in llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.06186, 2025. 9, 10
[110] Y. Sheng, L. Li, and D. D. Zeng, “Learning theorem rationale
for improving the mathematical reasoning capability of large
language models,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 14, 2025, pp. 15 151–15 159. 9, 10
[111] K. Zhao, B. Zhu, Q. Sun, and H. Zhang, “Unsupervised visual
chain-of-thought reasoning via preference optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.18397, 2025. 9, 10
[112] J. Wang, Z. Kang, H. Wang, H. Jiang, J. Li, B. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Ran,
X. Liang, C. Feng, and J. Xiao, “Vgr: Visual grounded reasoning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11991, 2025. 9, 10
[113] H. Shen, P. Liu, J. Li, C. Fang, Y. Ma, J. Liao, Q. Shen, Z. Zhang,
K. Zhao, Q. Zhang, R. Xu, and T. Zhao, “Vlm-r1: A stable and
generalizable r1-style large vision-language model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.07615, 2025. 9, 10
[114] Z. Liu, Z. Sun, Y. Zang, X. Dong, Y. Cao, H. Duan, D. Lin, and
J. Wang, “Visual-rft: Visual reinforcement fine-tuning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.01785, 2025. 9, 10
[115] L. Zhao, E. Yu, Z. Ge, J. Yang, H. Wei, H. Zhou, J. Sun, Y. Peng,
R. Dong, C. Han et al., “Chatspot: Bootstrapping multimodal
llms via precise referring instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09474, 2023. 8
[116] Y. Yuan, W. Li, J. Liu, D. Tang, X. Luo, C. Qin, L. Zhang, and J. Zhu,
“Osprey: Pixel understanding with visual instruction tuning,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 28 202–28 211. 8
[117] A. Shtedritski, C. Rupprecht, and A. Vedaldi, “What does clip
know about a red circle? visual prompt engineering for vlms,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 11 987–11 997. 8
[118] X. Li, H. Yuan, W. Li, H. Ding, S. Wu, W. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Chen,
and C. C. Loy, “Omg-seg: Is one model good enough for all
segmentation?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10229, 2024. 8
[119] J. Wang and L. Ke, “Llm-seg: Bridging image segmentation and
large language model reasoning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
1765–1774. 9
[120] T. Zhang, X. Li, H. Fei, H. Yuan, S. Wu, S. Ji, C. C. Loy, and
S. Yan, “Omg-llava: Bridging image-level, object-level, pixel-level
reasoning and understanding,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 37, pp. 71 737–71 767, 2024. 9
[121] J. Zheng, J. Li, S. Cheng, Y. Zheng, J. Li, J. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liu, and
X. Zhan, “Instruction-guided visual masking,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 37, pp. 126 004–126 031, 2024. 9
[122] L. Zhu, T. Chen, D. Ji, J. Ye, and J. Liu, “Llafs: When large
language models meet few-shot segmentation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 3065–3075. 9
[123] Y. Zhang, S. Qian, B. Peng, S. Liu, and J. Jia, “Prompt highlighter:
Interactive control for multi-modal llms,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 13 215–13 224. 9
[124] R. Pi, L. Yao, J. Gao, J. Zhang, and T. Zhang, “Perceptiongpt:
Effectively fusing visual perception into llm,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024,
pp. 27 124–27 133. 9
[125] Y. Shen, C. Fu, P. Chen, M. Zhang, K. Li, X. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Lin, and
R. Ji, “Aligning and prompting everything all at once for universal
visual perception,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 2024, pp. 13 193–
13 203. 9
[126] Z. Lin, Y. Gao, X. Zhao, Y. Yang, and J. Sang, “Mind with eyes:

===== PAGE 26 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
26
from language reasoning to multimodal reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.18071, 2025. 9
[127] L. Guo, A. C. Rivera, P. Tang, H. Ren, and Z. Song, “Hierarchi-
cal contextual grounding lvlm: Enhancing fine-grained visual-
language understanding with robust grounding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.16974, 2025. 9
[128] C. B. Browne, E. P. Powley, D. Whitehouse, S. M. Lucas, P. I.
Cowling, P. Rohlfshagen, S. Tavener, D. Perez, S. Samothrakis, and
S. Colton, “A survey of monte carlo tree search methods,” IEEE
Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 1–43, 2012. 9, 22
[129] Z. Ma, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, B. Ding, and J. Luo, “Crepe: Can
vision-language foundation models reason compositionally?” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 10 910–10 920. 9
[130] G. Zheng, B. Yang, J. Tang, H.-Y. Zhou, and S. Yang, “Ddcot: Duty-
distinct chain-of-thought prompting for multimodal reasoning
in language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 36, pp. 5168–5191, 2023. 9
[131] T. Kojima, S. S. Gu, M. Reid, Y. Matsuo, and Y. Iwasawa,
“Large language models are zero-shot reasoners,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.11916, 2022. 9
[132] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in
large language models,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 35, pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022. 9, 10, 11
[133] Y. Wang, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Y. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Luo, and
H. Fei, “Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning: A comprehensive
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12605, 2025. 9
[134] R. Zhao, Q. Yuan, J. Li, H. Hu, Y. Li, C. Zheng, and F. Gao,
“Sce2drivex: A generalized mllm framework for scene-to-drive
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14917, 2025. 10
[135] Z. Shao et al., “Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of math-
ematical reasoning in open language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300, 2024. 10
[136] H. Tan, Y. Ji, X. Hao, M. Lin, P. Wang, Z. Wang, and S. Zhang,
“Reason-rft: Reinforcement fine-tuning for visual reasoning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.20752, 2025. 10
[137] Y. Liu, B. Peng, Z. Zhong, Z. Yue, F. Lu, B. Yu, and J. Jia,
“Seg-zero: Reasoning-chain guided segmentation via cognitive
reinforcement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06520, 2025. 10
[138] Y. Yang, X. He, H. Pan, X. Jiang, Y. Deng, X. Yang, H. Lu, D. Yin,
F. Rao, M. Zhu et al., “R1-onevision: Advancing generalized
multimodal reasoning through cross-modal formalization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.10615, 2025. 10
[139] Z. Wang, K. Wang, Q. Wang, P. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Yang, X. Jin, K. Yu,
M. N. Nguyen, L. Liu et al., “Ragen: Understanding self-evolution
in llm agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.20073, 2025. 10
[140] R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, S. Ermon, C. D. Manning, and
C. Finn, “Direct preference optimization: Your language model
is secretly a reward model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
10, 12
[141] Y. Xie, G. Li, X. Xu, and M.-Y. Kan, “V-dpo: Mitigating halluci-
nation in large vision language models via vision-guided direct
preference optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02712, 2024. 10
[142] T. Bai, Z. Hu, F. Sun, J. Qiu, Y. Jiang, G. He, B. Zeng, C. He, B. Yuan,
and W. Zhang, “Multi-step visual reasoning with visual tokens
scaling and verification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07235, 2025. 10
[143] P. Lu, S. Mishra, T. Xia, L. Qiu, K.-W. Chang, S.-C. Zhu, O. Tafjord,
P. Clark, and A. Kalyan, “Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning
via thought chains for science question answering,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. 11
[144] D. Schwenk, A. Khandelwal, C. Clark, K. Marino, and R. Mottaghi,
“A-okvqa: A benchmark for visual question answering using world
knowledge,” in European conference on computer vision.
Springer,
2022, pp. 146–162. 11
[145] J. Qi, M. Ding, W. Wang, Y. Bai, Q. Lv, W. Hong, B. Xu et al.,
“Cogcom: A visual language model with chain-of-manipulations,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04236, 2024. 11, 14
[146] R. Tarjan, “Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms,” SIAM
journal on computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 146–160, 1972. 11
[147] X. Chen, R. Zhang, D. Jiang, A. Zhou, S. Yan, W. Lin, and H. Li,
“Mint-cot: Enabling interleaved visual tokens in mathematical
chain-of-thought reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05331, 2025.
11, 14
[148] H. Yao et al., “Mulberry: Empowering mllm with o1-like reasoning
and reflection via collective monte carlo tree search,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.18319, 2024. 11
[149] Q. Wu, X. Yang, Y. Zhou, C. Fang, B. Song, X. Sun, and R. Ji,
“Grounded chain-of-thought for multimodal large language mod-
els,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12799, 2025. 11
[150] Z. Chen, R. Zhao, C. Luo, M. Sun, X. Yu, Y. Kang, and R. Huang,
“Sifthinker: Spatially-aware image focus for visual reasoning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06259, 2025. 11, 14
[151] A. Su, H. Wang, W. Ren, F. Lin, and W. Chen, “Pixel reasoner:
Incentivizing pixel-space reasoning with curiosity-driven rein-
forcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15966, 2025. 11, 14,
22
[152] Z. Ma, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Tan, M. Shu, J. C. Niebles, S. Heinecke,
H. Wang, C. Xiong, R. Krishna, and S. Savarese, “Latte: Learning
to think with vision specialists,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05479,
2024. 11
[153] Z. Ma, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Tan, M. Shu, J. C. Niebles,
S. Heinecke, H. Wang, C. Xiong, R. Krishna, and S. Savarese,
“Taco: Learning multi-modal action models with synthetic chains-
of-thought-and-action,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05479, 2024. 11,
15
[154] E. Zelikman, Y. Wu, N. D. Goodman, and O. Holzman,
“Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.14465, 2022. 12
[155] C. Tan, J. Wei, Z. Gao, L. Sun, S. Li, X. Yang, and S. Z. Li,
“Boosting the power of small multimodal reasoning models to
match larger models with self-consistency training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.14109, 2023. 12
[156] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang,
A. Chowdhery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain
of thought reasoning in language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.11171, 2022. 12, 13
[157] J. Xia, B. Tong, Y. Zang, R. Shao, and K. Zhou, “Bootstrapping
grounded chain-of-thought in multimodal llms for data-efficient
model adaptation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02859, 2025. 12
[158] T. Yu, H. Li, R. Zhou, J. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Jiang, and D. Tao,
“Rlaif-v: Aligning mllms through open-source ai feedback for
super gpt-4v trustworthiness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17220,
2024. 12
[159] R. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Sun, Z. Gan, Y. Yang,
R. Pang, and Y. Yang, “Improve vision language model chain-of-
thought reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16198, 2024. 12
[160] K. Yang, D. Klein, A. Celikyilmaz, N. Peng, and Y. Tian, “Rlcd:
Reinforcement learning from contrastive distillation for language
model alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12950, 2023. 12
[161] J. He, H. Lin, Q. Wang, Y. Fung, and H. Ji, “Self-correction is more
than refinement: A learning framework for visual and language
reasoning tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04055, 2024. 12
[162] R. Pi, T. Han, W. Xiong, J. Zhang, R. Liu, R. Pan, and T. Zhang,
“Strengthening multimodal large language model with boot-
strapped preference optimization,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 382–398. 12
[163] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and
K. Narasimhan, “Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving
with large language models,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 36, pp. 11 809–11 822, 2023. 13
[164] A. Bundy and L. Wallen, “Breadth-first search,” in Catalogue of
artificial intelligence tools.
Springer, 1984, pp. 13–13. 13
[165] L. Gui, C. Gˆarbacea, and V. Veitch, “Bonbon alignment for
large language models and the sweetness of best-of-n sampling,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 2851–
2885, 2024. 13
[166] Y. Xie, K. Kawaguchi, Y. Zhao, J. X. Zhao, M.-Y. Kan, J. He,
and M. Xie, “Self-evaluation guided beam search for reasoning,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp.
41 618–41 650, 2023. 13
[167] A. Holtzman, J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, and Y. Choi, “The curious
case of neural text degeneration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751,
2019. 13
[168] G. Chen, M. Liao, C. Li, and K. Fan, “Alphamath almost zero: pro-
cess supervision without process,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 27 689–27 724, 2024. 13
[169] D. Zhang, S. Zhoubian, Z. Hu, Y. Yue, Y. Dong, and J. Tang,
“Rest-mcts*: Llm self-training via process reward guided tree
search,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
pp. 64 735–64 772, 2024. 13

===== PAGE 27 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
27
[170] G. Chen, M. Liao, C. Li, and K. Fan, “Step-level value prefer-
ence optimization for mathematical reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.10858, 2024. 13
[171] Y. Wang, S. Wang, Q. Cheng, Z. Fei, L. Ding, Q. Guo, D. Tao,
and X. Qiu, “Visuothink: Empowering lvlm reasoning with
multimodal tree search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09130, 2025.
13
[172] D. Acuna, X. Lu, J. Jung, H. Kim, A. Kar, S. Fidler, and Y. Choi,
“Socratic-mcts: Test-time visual reasoning by asking the right
questions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08927, 2025. 13
[173] C. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wang, Y. Lai, H. Sun, H. Chang, F. Ma,
and W. Yu, “Vrest: Enhancing reasoning in large vision-language
models through tree search and self-reward mechanism,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.08691, 2025. 13
[174] J. Wu, M. Feng, S. Zhang, R. Jin, F. Che, Z. Wen, and J. Tao,
“Boosting multimodal reasoning with mcts-automated structured
thinking,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2502, 2025. 13
[175] Q. Huang, X. Dong, P. Zhang, B. Wang, C. He, J. Wang, D. Lin,
W. Zhang, and N. Yu, “Opera: Alleviating hallucination in
multi-modal large language models via over-trust penalty and
retrospection-allocation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 13 418–13 427.
13
[176] J. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Jie, L. Ma, and G. Li, “Mitigating hallucination
for large vision language model by inter-modality correlation
calibration decoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01926, 2025. 13
[177] Q. Hu, A. Wang, J. Song, D. Qiu, Q. Liu, and J. Su, “Boosting visual
knowledge-intensive training for lvlms through causality-driven
visual object completion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04453, 2025.
14
[178] J. Gao, Y. Li, Z. Cao, and W. Li, “Interleaved-modal chain-
of-thought,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 19 520–19 529. 14
[179] S. Yang, Y. Niu, Y. Liu, Y. Ye, B. Lin, and L. Yuan, “Look-back:
Implicit visual re-focusing in mllm reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.03019, 2025. 14
[180] Z. Zheng, M. Yang, J. Hong, C. Zhao, G. Xu, L. Yang, C. Shen,
and X. Yu, “Deepeyes: Incentivizing” thinking with images” via
reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14362, 2025. 14,
22
[181] G. Zhang, T. Zhong, Y. Xia, Z. Yu, H. Li, W. He, F. Shu, M. Liu,
D. She, Y. Wang et al., “Cmmcot: Enhancing complex multi-image
comprehension via multi-modal chain-of-thought and memory
augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05255, 2025. 14, 22
[182] M. Ni, Z. Yang, L. Li, C.-C. Lin, K. Lin, W. Zuo, and
L. Wang, “Point-rft: Improving multimodal reasoning with
visually grounded reinforcement finetuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.19702, 2025. 14
[183] J. Chung, J. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lee, M. S. Kim, and Y. Yu, “Don’t
look only once: Towards multimodal interactive reasoning with
selective visual revisitation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18842, 2025.
14
[184] B. Luan, H. Feng, H. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “Textcot:
Zoom in for enhanced multimodal text-rich image understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09797, 2024. 14
[185] Y. Hu, W. Shi, X. Fu, D. Roth, M. Ostendorf, L. Zettlemoyer, N. A.
Smith, and R. Krishna, “Visual sketchpad: Sketching as a visual
chain of thought for multimodal language models,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 139 348–139 379,
2024. 14, 15
[186] Z. Liu, Y. Dong, Y. Rao, J. Zhou, and J. Lu, “Chain-of-spot:
Interactive reasoning improves large vision-language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12966, 2024. 14
[187] Q.-H. Le, L. H. Dang, N. H. Le, T. Tran, and T. M. Le, “Progressive
multi-granular alignments for grounded reasoning in large vision-
language models,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 4, 2025, pp. 4473–4481. 14
[188] Z. Li, R. Luo, J. Zhang, M. Qiu, X. Huang, and Z. Wei, “Vocot:
Unleashing visually grounded multi-step reasoning in large multi-
modal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16919, 2024. 14
[189] M. Zhu, H. Zhong, C. Zhao, Z. Du, Z. Huang, M. Liu, H. Chen,
C. Zou, J. Chen, M. Yang et al., “Active-o3: Empowering multi-
modal large language models with active perception via grpo,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21457, 2025. 14
[190] C. Jiang, Y. Heng, W. Ye, H. Yang, H. Xu, M. Yan, J. Zhang,
F. Huang, and S. Zhang, “VLM-R3: Region recognition, reasoning,
and refinement for enhanced multimodal chain-of-thought,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.16192, 2025. 14
[191] S. Wang, G. Fang, L. Kong, X. Li, J. Xu, S. Yang, Q. Li, J. Zhu, and
X. Wang, “Pixelthink: Towards efficient chain-of-pixel reasoning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23727, 2025. 14
[192] M. Bigverdi, Z. Luo, C.-Y. Hsieh, E. Shen, D. Chen, L. G. Shapiro,
and R. Krishna, “Perception tokens enhance visual reasoning
in multimodal language models,” in Proceedings of the Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 3836–3845. 14
[193] Y. Man, D.-A. Huang, G. Liu, S. Sheng, S. Liu, L.-Y. Gui, J. Kautz,
Y.-X. Wang, and Z. Yu, “Argus: Vision-centric reasoning with
grounded chain-of-thought,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 14 268–14 280. 14
[194] Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Yang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
Z. Liu, J. Gao, L. Wang et al., “Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for
multimodal reasoning and action,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381,
2023. 15
[195] D. Sur´ıs, S. Menon, and C. Vondrick, “Vipergpt: Visual inference
via python execution for reasoning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023, pp. 11 888–
11 898. 14, 15
[196] Z. Gao et al., “Clova: A closed-loop visual assistant with tool
usage and update,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 15
[197] S. Liu, H. Cheng, H. Liu, H. Zhang, F. Li, T. Ren, X. Zou, J. Yang,
H. Su, J. Zhu et al., “Llava-plus: Learning to use tools for creating
multimodal agents,” in European conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 126–142. 15
[198] Z. Su et al., “Openthinkimg: Learning to think with images via vi-
sual tool reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08617,
2025. 15, 22
[199] T. Gupta and A. Kembhavi, “Visual programming: Compositional
visual reasoning without training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 2023,
pp. 14 953–14 962. 14
[200] Y. Shen, K. Song, X. Tan, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, “Hug-
ginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging
face,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36,
pp. 38 154–38 180, 2023. 14
[201] Z. Liu, Y. He, W. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Chen, Q. Zhang,
Z. Lai, Y. Yang, Q. Li et al., “Interngpt: Solving vision-centric
tasks by interacting with chatgpt beyond language,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05662, 2023. 14
[202] Q. Dong, L. Li, D. Dai, C. Zheng, J. Ma, R. Li, H. Xia, J. Xu, Z. Wu,
T. Liu et al., “A survey on in-context learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.00234, 2022. 15
[203] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and
Y. Cao, “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023. 15
[204] Z. Khan, V. K. BG, S. Schulter, Y. Fu, and M. Chandraker, “Self-
training large language models for improved visual program syn-
thesis with visual reinforcement,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
14 344–14 353. 15
[205] Z. Ma, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Tan, M. Shu, J. C. Niebles, S. Heinecke,
H. Wang, C. Xiong, R. Krishna, and S. Savarese, “Latte: Learning
to reason with vision specialists,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,
2025. 15
[206] F. Ke, X. Leng, Z. Cai, Z. Khan, W. Wang, P. D. Haghighi,
H. Rezatofighi, M. Chandraker et al., “Dwim: Towards tool-aware
visual reasoning via discrepancy-aware workflow generation &
instruct-masking tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19263, 2025. 15
[207] X. Fu, M. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Corring, Y. Lu, J. Yang, D. Roth,
D. Florencio, and C. Zhang, “Refocus: Visual editing as a chain
of thought for structured image understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.05452, 2025. 15
[208] Y. Hu, O. Stretcu, C.-T. Lu, K. Viswanathan, K. Hata, E. Luo,
R. Krishna, and A. Fuxman, “Visual program distillation: Distilling
tools and programmatic reasoning into vision-language models,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 9590–9601. 15
[209] C. Wang, W. Luo, S. Dong, X. Xuan, Z. Li, L. Ma, and S. Gao,
“Mllm-tool: A multimodal large language model for tool agent
learning,” in 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision (WACV).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 6678–6687. 15

===== PAGE 28 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
28
[210] M. Wu, J. Yang, J. Jiang, M. Li, K. Yan, H. Yu, M. Zhang, C. Zhai,
and K. Nahrstedt, “Vtool-r1: Vlms learn to think with images via
reinforcement learning on multimodal tool use,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.19255, 2025. 15
[211] Z. Liu et al., “Visual agentic reinforcement fine-tuning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.14246, 2025. 15
[212] S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. L. Zitnick,
and D. Parikh, “Vqa: Visual question answering,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp.
2425–2433. 15
[213] Y. Goyal, T. Khot, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and D. Parikh, “Mak-
ing the v in vqa matter: Elevating the role of image understanding
in visual question answering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 6904–6913. 15
[214] D. A. Hudson and C. D. Manning, “Gqa: A new dataset for real-
world visual reasoning and compositional question answering,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 6700–6709. 15
[215] R. Zellers, Y. Bisk, A. Farhadi, and Y. Choi, “From recognition to
cognition: Visual commonsense reasoning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019,
pp. 6720–6731. 15
[216] K. Marino, M. Rastegari, A. Farhadi, and R. Mottaghi, “Ok-
vqa: A visual question answering benchmark requiring external
knowledge,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 3195–3204. 15
[217] J. Gao, Q. Wu, A. Blair, and M. Pagnucco, “Lora: A logical
reasoning augmented dataset for visual question answering,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp.
30 579–30 591, 2023. 15
[218] L. M. Schulze Buschoff, E. Akata, M. Bethge, and E. Schulz, “Visual
cognition in multimodal large language models,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 96–106, 2025. 16, 17
[219] C. Zhang, F. Gao, B. Jia, Y. Zhu, and S.-C. Zhu, “Raven: A dataset
for relational and analogical visual reasoning,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2019, pp. 5317–5327. 16
[220] D. Ghosal, V. T. Y. Han, C. Y. Ken, and S. Poria, “Are language
models puzzle prodigies? algorithmic puzzles unveil serious chal-
lenges in multimodal reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03864,
2024. 16
[221] X. Liu, D. Yin, Y. Feng, and D. Zhao, “Things not written in
text: Exploring spatial commonsense from visual signals,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.08075, 2022. 16
[222] E. Liu, C. Cui, K. Zheng, and G. Neubig, “Testing the ability of
language models to interpret figurative language,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.12632, 2022. 16
[223] N. Alampara, M. Schilling-Wilhelmi, M. R´ıos-Garc´ıa, I. Mandal,
P. Khetarpal, H. S. Grover, N. A. Krishnan, and K. M. Jablonka,
“Probing the limitations of multimodal language models for
chemistry and materials research,” Nature computational science,
pp. 1–10, 2025. 16
[224] P. Lu, S. Mishra, T. Xia, L. Qiu, K.-W. Chang, S.-C. Zhu, O. Tafjord,
P. Clark, and A. Kalyan, “Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning
via thought chains for science question answering,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 2507–2521, 2022.
16
[225] M. Dreyer, J. Berend, T. Labarta, J. Vielhaben, T. Wiegand,
S. Lapuschkin, and W. Samek, “Mechanistic understanding and
validation of large ai models with semanticlens,” Nature Machine
Intelligence, pp. 1–14, 2025. 16, 17
[226] P. Lu, H. Bansal, T. Xia, J. Liu, C. Li, H. Hajishirzi, H. Cheng,
K.-W. Chang, M. Galley, and J. Gao, “Mathvista: Evaluating
mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02255, 2023. 16
[227] R. Zhang, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Guo, P. Qiu, A. Zhou, P. Lu,
K.-W. Chang, Y. Qiao et al., “Mathverse: Does your multi-modal
llm truly see the diagrams in visual math problems?” in European
Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 169–186. 16
[228] K. Wang, J. Pan, W. Shi, Z. Lu, H. Ren, A. Zhou, M. Zhan, and
H. Li, “Measuring multimodal mathematical reasoning with math-
vision dataset,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 37, pp. 95 095–95 169, 2024. 16
[229] P. Zhou, F. Zhang, X. Peng, Z. Xu, J. Ai, Y. Qiu, C. Li, Z. Li, M. Li,
Y. Feng et al., “Mdk12-bench: A multi-discipline benchmark for
evaluating reasoning in multimodal large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.05782, 2025. 16
[230] C. Ma, J. Ding, J. Zhang, Z. Ma, H. Qing, B. Gao, L. Chen, M. Song
et al., “Sci-reason: A dataset with chain-of-thought rationales for
complex multimodal reasoning in academic areas,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.06637, 2025. 16
[231] J. Feng, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Guo, Z. Zhou, X. Chen, Z. Li, and
D. Yin, “Mathreal: We keep it real! a real scene benchmark for
evaluating math reasoning in multimodal large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06009, 2025. 16
[232] Z. Zhou, S. Liu, M. Ning, W. Liu, J. Wang, D. F. Wong, X. Huang,
Q. Wang, and K. Huang, “Is your model really a good math
reasoner? evaluating mathematical reasoning with checklist,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08733, 2024. 16
[233] X. Xu, J. Zhang, T. Chen, Z. Chao, J. Hu, and C. Yang, “Ugmath-
bench: A diverse and dynamic benchmark for undergraduate-
level mathematical reasoning with large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.13766, 2025. 16
[234] Y. Hao, J. Gu, H. W. Wang, L. Li, Z. Yang, L. Wang, and Y. Cheng,
“Can mllms reason in multimodality? emma: An enhanced mul-
timodal reasoning benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05444,
2025. 16
[235] P. Wang, Z.-Z. Li, F. Yin, D. Ran, and C.-L. Liu, “Mv-math:
Evaluating multimodal math reasoning in multi-visual contexts,”
in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, 2025, pp. 19 541–19 551. 16
[236] Z. Hu, J. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Xie, and Y. Song, “Rmath: A
logic reasoning-focused datasets toward mathematical multistep
reasoning tasks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 22, 2025, pp. 24 104–24 112. 16
[237] X. Yue, Y. Ni, K. Zhang, T. Zheng, R. Liu, G. Zhang, S. Stevens,
D. Jiang, W. Ren, Y. Sun et al., “Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline
multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert
agi,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 9556–9567. 16
[238] K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser,
M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano et al., “Train-
ing verifiers to solve math word problems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. 16
[239] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Kadavath, A. Arora, S. Basart,
E. Tang, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt, “Measuring mathematical
problem solving with the math dataset, 2021,” URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2103.03874, vol. 2, 2024. 16
[240] M.-H. Guo, J. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Song, H. Peng, Y.-X. Deng, X. Dong,
K. Nakayama, Z. Geng, C. Wang et al., “R-bench: Graduate-level
multi-disciplinary benchmarks for llm & mllm complex reasoning
evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02018, 2025. 16
[241] J. Zhang, C. Petrui, K. Nikoli´c, and F. Tram`er, “Realmath: A contin-
uous benchmark for evaluating language models on research-level
mathematics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12575, 2025. 16
[242] G. Comanici, E. Bieber, M. Schaekermann, I. Pasupat, N. Sachdeva,
I. Dhillon, M. Blistein, O. Ram, D. Zhang, E. Rosen et al., “Gemini
2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality,
long context, and next generation agentic capabilities,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025. 17
[243] Google, “Introducing gemini 2.0: Our new ai model for the
agentic era,” https://blog.google/technology/google-deepmind/
google-gemini-ai-update-december-2024/, Dec 2024, accessed:
2025-09-24. 17
[244] G. Team, P. Georgiev, V. I. Lei, R. Burnell, L. Bai, A. Gulati,
G. Tanzer, D. Vincent, Z. Pan, S. Wang et al., “Gemini 1.5:
Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of
context,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024. 17
[245] OpenAI, “Gpt-5 system card,” OpenAI, Tech. Rep., 2025,
accessed: 2025-09-24. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.
com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf 17
[246] ——, “Gpt-4 technical report,” OpenAI, Tech. Rep., March
2023, gPT-4
Turbo
was announced later as an
updated
version.
Accessed:
2025-09-24.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//cdn.openai.com/papers/gpt-4.pdf 17
[247] ——, “Gpt-4v system card,” OpenAI, Tech. Rep., 2024, accessed:
2025-09-24. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/papers/
GPTV System Card.pdf 17
[248] xAI, “Grok-3 beta release,” https://x.ai/news/grok-3, 2025, ac-
cessed: 2025-09-24. 17
[249] A. Jaech, A. Kalai, A. Lerer, A. Richardson, A. El-Kishky, A. Low,
A. Helyar, A. Madry, A. Beutel, A. Carney et al., “Openai o1 system
card,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.16720, 2024. 17

===== PAGE 29 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
29
[250] Anthropic, “Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet,” https://www.
anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet, June 2024, accessed:
2025-09-24. 17
[251] Qwen Team, “Qwen2.5-max: Exploring the intelligence of
large-scale moe model,” https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen2.
5-max/, January 2025, accessed: 2025-09-24. 17
[252] K. Team, A. Du, B. Gao, B. Xing, C. Jiang, C. Chen, C. Li, C. Xiao,
C. Du, C. Liao et al., “Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement learning
with llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12599, 2025. 17
[253] J. Zhu, W. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Ye, L. Gu, H. Tian, Y. Duan,
W. Su, J. Shao et al., “Internvl3: Exploring advanced training
and test-time recipes for open-source multimodal models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.10479, 2025. 17
[254] Qwen Team, “Qvq: To see the world with wisdom,” https:
//qwenlm.github.io/blog/qvq-72b-preview/, December 2024,
accessed: 2025-09-24. 17
[255] B. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, R. Zhang, F. Li, H. Zhang, K. Zhang,
P. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Liu et al., “Llava-onevision: Easy visual task
transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326, 2024. 17
[256] A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman,
A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Yang, A. Fan et al., “The llama 3 herd
of models,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2407, 2024. 17
[257] W. Shao et al., “Ovis2.5 technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.11737, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2508.11737 17
[258] L. Du, F. Meng, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, P. Luo, Q. Zhang, and W. Shao,
“Mm-prm: Enhancing multimodal mathematical reasoning with
scalable step-level supervision,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.13427,
2025. 16
[259] G. Zhou, P. Qiu, C. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Xu, and M. Qiu,
“Reinforced mllm: A survey on rl-based reasoning in multimodal
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21277, 2025. 16
[260] B. P. de Almeida, G. Richard, H. Dalla-Torre, C. Blum, L. Hexemer,
P. Pandey, S. Laurent, C. Rajesh, M. Lopez, A. Laterre et al., “A
multimodal conversational agent for dna, rna and protein tasks,”
Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–14, 2025. 17
[261] Q. Wu, P. Wang, X. Wang, X. He, and W. Zhu, “Medical vqa,” in
Visual Question Answering: From Theory to Application.
Springer,
2022, pp. 165–176. 17
[262] J. Wu, Y. Kim, and H. Wu, “Hallucination benchmark in medical
visual question answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05827, 2024.
17
[263] X. He, Y. Zhang, L. Mou, E. Xing, and P. Xie, “Pathvqa: 30000+
questions for medical visual question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10286, 2020. 17, 22
[264] S. Gautam, A. M. Stor˚as, C. Midoglu, S. A. Hicks, V. Thambawita,
P. Halvorsen, and M. A. Riegler, “Kvasir-vqa: A text-image pair gi
tract dataset,” in Proceedings of the First International Workshop on
Vision-Language Models for Biomedical Applications, 2024, pp. 3–12.
17
[265] L. Bai, M. Islam, L. Seenivasan, and H. Ren, “Surgical-vqla:
Transformer with gated vision-language embedding for visual
question localized-answering in robotic surgery,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.11692, 2023. 17
[266] J. Burgess, J. J. Nirschl, L. Bravo-S´anchez, A. Lozano, S. R. Gupte,
J. G. Galaz-Montoya, Y. Zhang, Y. Su, D. Bhowmik, Z. Coman et al.,
“Microvqa: A multimodal reasoning benchmark for microscopy-
based scientific research,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 19 552–19 564. 17
[267] X. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Zhao, W. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie,
“Development of a large-scale medical visual question-answering
dataset,” Communications Medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 277, 2024. 17
[268] B. Liu, L.-M. Zhan, L. Xu, L. Ma, Y. Yang, and X.-M. Wu,
“Slake: A semantically-labeled knowledge-enhanced dataset for
medical visual question answering,” in 2021 IEEE 18th international
symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1650–1654.
17
[269] X. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Zhao, W. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie,
“Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question
answering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10415, 2023. 17, 18
[270] K. Zuo and Y. Jiang, “Medhallbench: A new benchmark for
assessing hallucination in medical large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.18947, 2024. 17
[271] J. Chen, D. Yang, T. Wu, Y. Jiang, X. Hou, M. Li, S. Wang,
D. Xiao, K. Li, and L. Zhang, “Detecting and evaluating medical
hallucinations in large vision language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.10185, 2024. 17
[272] T. Tu, S. Azizi, D. Driess, M. Schaekermann, M. Amin, P.-C. Chang,
A. Carroll, C. Lau, R. Tanno, I. Ktena et al., “Towards generalist
biomedical ai,” Nejm Ai, vol. 1, no. 3, p. AIoa2300138, 2024. 18
[273] A. Ing, A. Andrades, M. R. Cosenza, and J. O. Korbel, “Inte-
grating multimodal cancer data using deep latent variable path
modelling,” Nature Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–23, 2025. 18
[274] J. Zhou, X. He, L. Sun, J. Xu, X. Chen, Y. Chu, L. Zhou, X. Liao,
B. Zhang, S. Afvari et al., “Pre-trained multimodal large language
model enhances dermatological diagnosis using skingpt-4,” Nature
Communications, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 5649, 2024. 18
[275] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut,
J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Millican et al., “Gemini:
a family of highly capable multimodal models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805, 2023. 18
[276] W. Wang, Q. Lv, W. Yu, W. Hong, J. Qi, Y. Wang, J. Ji, Z. Yang,
L. Zhao, S. XiXuan et al., “Cogvlm: Visual expert for pretrained
language models,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 37, pp. 121 475–121 499, 2024. 18
[277] M. Moor, Q. Huang, S. Wu, M. Yasunaga, Y. Dalmia, J. Leskovec,
C. Zakka, E. P. Reis, and P. Rajpurkar, “Med-flamingo: a multi-
modal medical few-shot learner,” in Machine Learning for Health
(ML4H).
PMLR, 2023, pp. 353–367. 18
[278] J. Chen, D. Zhu, X. Shen, X. Li, Z. Liu, P. Zhang, R. Krishnamoorthi,
V. Chandra, Y. Xiong, and M. Elhoseiny, “Minigpt-v2: large
language model as a unified interface for vision-language multi-
task learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09478, 2023. 18
[279] Y. Chen, D. Xu, Y. Huang, S. Zhan, H. Wang, D. Chen, X. Wang,
M. Qiu, and H. Li, “Mimo: A medical vision language model
with visual referring multimodal input and pixel grounding
multimodal output,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 24 732–24 741. 18
[280] Y. Liu, H. Duan, Y. Zhang, B. Li, S. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Yuan,
J. Wang, C. He, Z. Liu et al., “Mmbench: Is your multi-modal
model an all-around player?” in European conference on computer
vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 216–233. 18
[281] Y. S. Y. Q. M. Zhang, X. L. J. Y. X. Zheng, K. L. X. S. Y. Wu,
R. J. C. Fu, and P. Chen, “Mme: A comprehensive evaluation
benchmark for multimodal large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.13394, 2021. 18
[282] L. Chen, J. Li, X. Dong, P. Zhang, Y. Zang, Z. Chen, H. Duan,
J. Wang, Y. Qiao, D. Lin et al., “Are we on the right way for
evaluating large vision-language models?” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 27 056–27 087, 2024. 18
[283] W. Yu, Z. Yang, L. Li, J. Wang, K. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Wang, and L. Wang,
“Mm-vet: Evaluating large multimodal models for integrated
capabilities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02490, 2023. 18
[284] A. Masry, D. X. Long, J. Q. Tan, S. Joty, and E. Hoque, “Chartqa: A
benchmark for question answering about charts with visual and
logical reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10244, 2022. 18
[285] C.-Y. Li, K.-J. Chang, C.-F. Yang, H.-Y. Wu, W. Chen, H. Bansal,
L. Chen, Y.-P. Yang, Y.-C. Chen, S.-P. Chen et al., “Towards a
holistic framework for multimodal llm in 3d brain ct radiology
report generation,” Nature Communications, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 2258,
2025. 18
[286] N. Methani, P. Ganguly, M. M. Khapra, and P. Kumar, “Plotqa:
Reasoning over scientific plots,” in Proceedings of the ieee/cvf winter
conference on applications of computer vision, 2020, pp. 1527–1536. 18
[287] Z. Xu, S. Du, Y. Qi, C. Xu, C. Yuan, and J. Guo, “Chartbench: A
benchmark for complex visual reasoning in charts,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.15915, 2023. 18
[288] Y. Ektefaie, G. Dasoulas, A. Noori, M. Farhat, and M. Zitnik,
“Multimodal learning with graphs,” Nature Machine Intelligence,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 340–350, 2023. 18
[289] A. Singh, V. Natarajan, M. Shah, Y. Jiang, X. Chen, D. Batra,
D. Parikh, and M. Rohrbach, “Towards vqa models that can read,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 8317–8326. 18
[290] M. Mathew, D. Karatzas, and C. Jawahar, “Docvqa: A dataset for
vqa on document images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter
conference on applications of computer vision, 2021, pp. 2200–2209. 18
[291] J. Wei, N. Xu, J. Zhu, Y. Hao, G. Wu, B. Yu, and L. Wang,
“Chartmind: A comprehensive benchmark for complex real-
world multimodal chart question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23242, 2025. 18
[292] C. Yang, C. Shi, Y. Liu, B. Shui, J. Wang, M. Jing, L. Xu, X. Zhu,
S. Li, Y. Zhang et al., “Chartmimic: Evaluating lmm’s cross-modal

===== PAGE 30 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
30
reasoning capability via chart-to-code generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09961, 2024. 18, 22
[293] P. Lu, L. Qiu, K.-W. Chang, Y. N. Wu, S.-C. Zhu, T. Rajpurohit,
P. Clark, and A. Kalyan, “Dynamic prompt learning via policy
gradient for semi-structured mathematical reasoning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.14610, 2022. 19
[294] M. Mathew, V. Bagal, R. Tito, D. Karatzas, E. Valveny, and
C. Jawahar, “Infographicvqa,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2022, pp.
1697–1706. 19
[295] J. Wei, C. Jia, Q. Chen, H. He, L. Sun, C. He, L. Wu, B. Yu,
and C. Tan, “Geoint-r1: Formalizing multimodal geometric rea-
soning with dynamic auxiliary constructions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.03173, 2025. 19
[296] A. Anthropic, “The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku,”
Claude-3 Model Card, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 4, 2024. 19
[297] OpenGVLab, “Internvl-chat-v1.5: An open-source multimodal
large language model,” https://huggingface.co/OpenGVLab/
InternVL-Chat-V1-5, 2024, accessed: 2025-09-24. 19, 21
[298] H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, B. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Shen, and Y. J. Lee,
“Llavanext: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge,” 2024.
19
[299] H. Lu, W. Liu, B. Zhang, B. Wang, K. Dong, B. Liu, J. Sun, T. Ren,
Z. Li, H. Yang et al., “Deepseek-vl: towards real-world vision-
language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05525, 2024.
19
[300] Y. Liu, G. Li, and L. Lin, “Cross-modal causal relational reasoning
for event-level visual question answering,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 11 624–
11 641, 2023. 19
[301] Q. Li, Q. Tao, S. Joty, J. Cai, and J. Luo, “Vqa-e: Explaining,
elaborating, and enhancing your answers for visual questions,” in
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2018, pp. 552–567. 19
[302] A. Foss, C. Evans, S. Mitts, K. Sinha, A. Rizvi, and J. T. Kao,
“Causalvqa: A physically grounded causal reasoning benchmark
for video models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09943, 2025. 19, 22
[303] P. Sarkar and A. Etemad, “Vcrbench: Exploring long-form causal
reasoning capabilities of large video language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.08455, 2025. 19
[304] X. Li, X. Li, S. Hu, K. Huang, and W. Zhang, “Causalstep: A
benchmark for explicit stepwise causal reasoning in videos,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.16878, 2025. 19
[305] C. Li, E. W. Im, and P. Fazli, “Vidhalluc: Evaluating temporal
hallucinations in multimodal large language models for video
understanding,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 13 723–13 733. 19
[306] H. Gao, J. Qu, J. Tang, B. Bi, Y. Liu, H. Chen, L. Liang, L. Su, and
Q. Huang, “Exploring hallucination of large multimodal models
in video understanding: Benchmark, analysis and mitigation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19622, 2025. 19
[307] Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Xie, and Z. Zheng, “Videohallucer:
Evaluating intrinsic and extrinsic hallucinations in large video-
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.16338, 2024. 19
[308] K. Sung-Bin, O. Hyun-Bin, J. Lee, A. Senocak, J. S. Chung, and T.-H.
Oh, “Avhbench: A cross-modal hallucination benchmark for audio-
visual large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18325,
2024. 19
[309] P. Ding, J. Wu, J. Kuang, D. Ma, X. Cao, X. Cai, S. Chen, J. Chen,
and S. Huang, “Hallu-pi: Evaluating hallucination in multi-modal
large language models within perturbed inputs,” in Proceedings
of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2024, pp.
10 707–10 715. 19
[310] J. Zhou, Y. Shu, B. Zhao, B. Wu, Z. Liang, S. Xiao, M. Qin, X. Yang,
Y. Xiong, B. Zhang et al., “Mlvu: Benchmarking multi-task long
video understanding,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 13 691–13 701. 19
[311] K. Li, Y. Wang, Y. He, Y. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Xu,
G. Chen, P. Luo et al., “Mvbench: A comprehensive multi-modal
video understanding benchmark,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
22 195–22 206. 19
[312] Y. Weng, M. Han, H. He, X. Chang, and B. Zhuang, “Longvlm:
Efficient long video understanding via large language models,”
in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp.
453–470. 20
[313] C. Fu, Y. Dai, Y. Luo, L. Li, S. Ren, R. Zhang, Z. Wang,
C. Zhou, Y. Shen, M. Zhang et al., “Video-mme: The first-ever
comprehensive evaluation benchmark of multi-modal llms in
video analysis,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 24 108–24 118. 20
[314] Y. Shao, Y. Jiang, T. A. Kanell, P. Xu, O. Khattab, and M. S. Lam,
“Assisting in writing wikipedia-like articles from scratch with
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14207, 2024. 20
[315] Z. Chen, W. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Z. Gao, E. Cui, J. Zhu, S. Ye,
H. Tian, Z. Liu et al., “Expanding performance boundaries of
open-source multimodal models with model, data, and test-time
scaling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05271, 2024. 20, 21
[316] Y. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Li, B. Li, Z. Ma, Z. Liu, and C. Li, “Llava-
video: Video instruction tuning with synthetic data,” Transactions
on Machine Learning Research, 2025. 20
[317] B. Lin, Y. Ye, B. Zhu, J. Cui, M. Ning, P. Jin, and L. Yuan, “Video-
llava: Learning united visual representation by alignment before
projection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10122, 2023. 20
[318] Y. Chen, H. Hu, Y. Luan, H. Sun, S. Changpinyo, A. Ritter, and
M.-W. Chang, “Can pre-trained vision and language models
answer visual information-seeking questions?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.11713, 2023. 20
[319] M. Sap, H. Rashkin, D. Chen, R. LeBras, and Y. Choi, “Socialiqa:
Commonsense reasoning about social interactions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09728, 2019. 20
[320] S.-Y. Ji, M.-K. Kim, and H.-J. Jun, “Emotion analysis ai model for
sensing architecture using eeg,” Applied Sciences, vol. 15, no. 5, p.
2742, 2025. 20
[321] Z. Han, B. Zhu, Y. Xu, P. Song, and X. Yang, “Benchmarking and
bridging emotion conflicts for multimodal emotion reasoning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01181, 2025. 20, 22
[322] T. Zhou, D. Chen, Q. Jiao, B. Ding, Y. Li, and Y. Shen, “Human-
vbench: Exploring human-centric video understanding capabil-
ities of mllms with synthetic benchmark data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.17574, 2024. 20
[323] S. Raza, A. Narayanan, V. R. Khazaie, A. Vayani, M. S. Chettiar,
A. Singh, M. Shah, and D. Pandya, “Humanibench: A human-
centric framework for large multimodal models evaluation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.11454, 2025. 20
[324] A. Zadeh, M. Chan, P. P. Liang, E. Tong, and L.-P. Morency,
“Social-iq: A question answering benchmark for artificial social
intelligence,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 8807–8817. 20
[325] M. Kwon, H. Hu, V. Myers, S. Karamcheti, A. Dragan, and
D. Sadigh, “Toward grounded commonsense reasoning,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 5463–5470. 20
[326] D. Romero, C. Lyu, H. A. Wibowo, T. Lynn, I. Hamed, A. N.
Kishore, A. Mandal, A. Dragonetti, A. Abzaliev, A. L. Tonja et al.,
“Cvqa: Culturally-diverse multilingual visual question answering
benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05967, 2024. 20
[327] Z. Ren, J. Ortega, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Guo, S. X. Yu, and
D. Whitney, “Veatic: Video-based emotion and affect tracking in
context dataset,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference
on Applications of Computer Vision, 2024, pp. 4467–4477. 20
[328] Z. Lian, H. Chen, L. Chen, H. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Ren, Z. Cheng,
B. Liu, R. Liu, X. Peng et al., “Affectgpt: A new dataset, model,
and benchmark for emotion understanding with multimodal large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16566, 2025. 20
[329] J. Hu, H. Shi, C. Dai, Z. Li, P. Song, and M. Wang, “Beyond emotion
recognition: A multi-turn multimodal emotion understanding and
reasoning benchmark,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16859, 2025. 20
[330] Y. Fu, Q. Liu, Q. Song, P. Zhang, and G. Liao, “Multi-hm: A chinese
multimodal dataset and fusion framework for emotion recognition
in human–machine dialogue systems,” Applied Sciences, vol. 15,
no. 8, p. 4509, 2025. 20
[331] Z. Cheng, Z.-Q. Cheng, J.-Y. He, K. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Lian, X. Peng,
and A. Hauptmann, “Emotion-llama: Multimodal emotion recog-
nition and reasoning with instruction tuning,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 110 805–110 853, 2024.
20
[332] P. Wang, S. Bai, S. Tan, S. Wang, Z. Fan, J. Bai, K. Chen, X. Liu,
J. Wang, W. Ge et al., “Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language
model’s perception of the world at any resolution,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.12191, 2024. 21
[333] Z. Cheng, S. Leng, H. Zhang, Y. Xin, X. Li, G. Chen, Y. Zhu,
W. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. Zhao et al., “Videollama 2: Advancing

===== PAGE 31 =====
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, SEPTEMBER 2025
31
spatial-temporal modeling and audio understanding in video-
llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07476, 2024. 21
[334] F. Zhang, Z. Cheng, C. Deng, H. Li, Z. Lian, Q. Chen, H. Liu,
W. Wang, Y.-F. Zhang, R. Zhang et al., “Mme-emotion: A holistic
evaluation benchmark for emotional intelligence in multimodal
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09210, 2025. 20
[335] S. Poria, D. Hazarika, N. Majumder, G. Naik, E. Cambria, and
R. Mihalcea, “Meld: A multimodal multi-party dataset for emotion
recognition in conversations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02508,
2018. 20
[336] J. Bi, S. Liang, X. Zhou, P. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Tang, L. Song, C. Huang,
G. Sun, J. He et al., “Why reasoning matters? a survey of
advancements in multimodal reasoning (v1),” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.03151, 2025. 20
[337] T. Adewumi, L. Alkhaled, N. Gurung, G. van Boven, and I. Pagliai,
“Fairness and bias in multimodal ai: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.19097, 2024. 21
[338] J. Lu, L. Song, M. Xu, B. Ahn, Y. Wang, C. Chen, A. Dehghan, and
Y. Yang, “Atoken: A unified tokenizer for vision,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.14476, 2025. 21
[339] H. Lin, T. Wang, Y. Ge, Y. Ge, Z. Lu, Y. Wei, Q. Zhang, Z. Sun,
and Y. Shan, “Toklip: Marry visual tokens to clip for multimodal
comprehension and generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05422,
2025. 21
[340] T.-H. Pham and C. Ngo, “Multimodal chain of continuous thought
for latent-space reasoning in vision-language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.12587, 2025. 21
[341] S. Liu, H. Ye, L. Xing, and J. Zou, “Reducing hallucinations in
vision-language models via latent space steering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.15778, 2024. 21
[342] N. Jiang, A. Kachinthaya, S. Petryk, and Y. Gandelsman, “Inter-
preting and editing vision-language representations to mitigate
hallucinations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02762, 2024. 21
[343] C. Team, “Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09818, 2024. 21
[344] Y. Xu, C. Li, H. Zhou, X. Wan, C. Zhang, A. Korhonen, and I. Vuli´c,
“Visual planning: Let’s think only with images,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.11409, 2025. 21
[345] C. Li, W. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Xia, S. Mao, L. Dong, I. Vuli´c, and F. Wei,
“Imagine while reasoning in space: Multimodal visualization-of-
thought,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.07542, 2025. 21
[346] W. Wu, S. Mao, Y. Zhang, Y. Xia, L. Dong, L. Cui, and F. Wei,
“Mind’s eye of llms: visualization-of-thought elicits spatial rea-
soning in large language models,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 90 277–90 317, 2024. 21
[347] J. Wu, J. Guan, K. Feng, Q. Liu, S. Wu, L. Wang, W. Wu, and
T. Tan, “Reinforcing spatial reasoning in vision-language models
with interwoven thinking and visual drawing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.09965, 2025. 21
[348] Y. Zhan, Z. Wu, Y. Zhu, R. Xue, R. Luo, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. Li,
Z. He, Z. Yang et al., “Gthinker: Towards general multimodal rea-
soning via cue-guided rethinking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01078,
2025. 22
[349] J. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Liu, J. Luan, R. Yan et al., “Weaving context
across images: Improving vision-language models through focus-
centric visual chains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20199, 2025. 22
[350] D. Jiang, X. He, H. Zeng, C. Wei, M. Ku, Q. Liu, and W. Chen,
“Mantis: Interleaved multi-image instruction tuning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.01483, 2024. 22
