
===== PAGE 1 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Yiyang Zhou * 1 Chenhang Cui * 1 Rafael Rafailov 2 Chelsea Finn 2 Huaxiu Yao 1
Abstract
Instruction-following Vision Large Language
Models (VLLMs) have achieved significant
progress recently on a variety of tasks. These ap-
proaches merge strong pre-trained vision models
and large language models (LLMs). Since these
components are trained separately, the learned rep-
resentations need to be aligned with joint training
on additional image-language pairs. This proce-
dure is not perfect and can cause the model to
hallucinate - provide answers that do not accu-
rately reflect the image, even when the core LLM
is highly factual and the vision backbone has suffi-
ciently complete representations. In this work, we
frame the hallucination problem as an alignment
issue, tackle it with preference tuning. Specifi-
cally, we propose POVID to generate feedback
data with AI models. We use ground-truth instruc-
tions as the preferred response and a two-stage
approach to generate dispreferred data. First, we
prompt GPT-4V to inject plausible hallucinations
into the correct answer. Second, we distort the
image to trigger the inherent hallucination behav-
ior of the VLLM. This is an automated approach,
which does not rely on human data generation
or require a perfect expert, which makes it eas-
ily scalable. Finally, both of these generation
strategies are integrated into an RLHF pipeline
via Direct Preference Optimization. In experi-
ments across broad benchmarks, we show that we
can not only reduce hallucinations, but improve
model performance across standard benchmarks,
outperforming prior approaches. Our data and
code are available at https://github.com/
YiyangZhou/POVID.
1. Introduction
Vision Large Language Models (VLLMs) have achieved sig-
nificant success in various vision understanding tasks, such
*Equal contribution, authorship order determined by coin flip.
Work was done during Chenhang Cui and Yiyang Zhou’s remote
internship at UNC. 1UNC-Chapel Hill 2Stanford University. Cor-
respondence to: Huaxiu Yao <huaxiu@cs.unc.edu>.
Preprint
SciQA-IMG
MMBench
MM-Vet
LLaVA-Bench
100 - CHAIRS
100 - CHAIRi
POPE
MMHal
62.5
65.0
67.5
43.75
52.5
61.25
27.25 29.5
31.75
63.0
66.0
69.0
43.75
57.5
71.25
88.25
91.5
94.75
78.75
82.5
86.25
1.5
2.0
2.5
N/A
LLaVA-1.5
+ Vlfeedback
+ Human-Preference
+ RLHF-V
POVID (ours)
Figure 1. An overall performance comparison between POVID and
other VLLM preference learning approaches.
as image captioning (Vinyals et al., 2015; Li et al., 2022;
2023c) and vision question answering (Ye et al., 2023; An-
tol et al., 2015). These VLLM models fuse larger-scale
pre-trained vision models into the representation space of
a large language models (LLM), allowing the LLM access
to the visual representations. However, such VLLMs are
not perfect and even suffer from “hallucinations”, a phe-
nomenon in which the language model generates content
that is not grounded in the image, such as imagined objects
and even scenes, wrong spatial relationships or categories,
etc. Such artifacts are present even when both the vision
backbone produces high-quality visual features and the lan-
guage model itself is factual and accurate. These issues
can pose significant risks when VLLMs are deployed in
high-stakes scenarios, such as medical domains (Li et al.,
2023b) or autonomous driving (Dewangan et al., 2023).
As discussed by Cui et al. (2023), the potential reason for
hallucinations in VLLMs lies in their tendency to priori-
tize common sense or stereotypes present in the training
language data, often disregarding the actual visual input
information. In this paper, we attribute this issue to the
lack of alignment between the image and text modalities,
resulting in a reduced focus on input image information.
Recent research efforts have sought to enhance the align-
ment between modalities through preference fine-tuning
techniques, such as reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) (Sun et al., 2023). Concurrent works (Li
et al., 2023d; Zhao et al., 2023) also use the Direct Pref-
erence Optimization (DPO) framework, but they rely on
the traditional preference data generation process in LLMs,
1
arXiv:2402.11411v1  [cs.LG]  18 Feb 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
where both preferred and dispreferred responses may po-
tentially be incorrect. However, in VLLMs, the produced
responses are centered around the image data rather than
being generated freely like in LLMs. When comparing two
responses, both of which may be incorrect for the given task,
the model may struggle to accurately align the image with
the correct generated response. In (Yu et al., 2023a) the
authors propose to solve this issue by collection corrective
feedback, which shows strong results, but relies on costly
human data gathering.
Unlike prior works that generate both preferred and dispre-
ferred data, we propose Preference Optimization in VLLM
with AI-Generated Dispreferences (POVID) framework,
aiming to exclusively generate dispreferred feedback data
using AI models. In POVID we employ a high-quality
ground truth multi-modal instruction as the preferred an-
swer and employ two strategies to generate dispreferred
responses. First, we utilize GPT-4V to introduce plausible
hallucinations into the answer, which we then use as the
dispreferred response. Second, we aim to provoke inherent
hallucination patterns and subsequently correct them within
the target VLLM that requires fine-tuning. We achieve this
goal by introducing noise, triggering inherent hallucination
patterns within the VLLMs. The introduction of noise dis-
rupts the VLLM’s comprehension of the image, leading it
to generate uncertain responses that rely more on textual
context or the knowledge it has acquired from the training
data. Given that the inherent hallucination patterns of the tar-
get VLLM evolve during the training process, the response
generation with the noisy image occurs in real-time during
training, and this is treated as dispreference. Finally, we
integrate both forms of dispreference into the DPO opti-
mization framework, specifically targeting the alignment of
language generation with the image.
The primary contribution of this paper is POVID, which
utilizes AI-generated dispreference to align the image and
text modalities in VLLMs. This approach explicitly con-
trasts a hallucinatory answer with a truthful one, eliminating
the need for gathering human feedback and making it eas-
ily deployable at scale. Our empirical results demonstrate
the promise of our framework in reducing hallucinations
and enhancing other VLLM-related tasks. In particular, as
shown in Figure 1, our approach significantly improves per-
formance compared to other preference tuning methods in
VLLMs, achieving an average improvement of 12.4% im-
provements on average. Additionally, we demonstrate that
POVID can redirect the attention of VLLMs towards the
image modality, resulting in better modality alignment.
2. Preliminaries
Our approach aims to fine-tune VLLMs for better aligning
the image and text modalities uses the framework of prefer-
ence tuning from preferences over responses. In this section,
we will provide some notations of VLLMs and an overview
of direct preference optimization (Rafailov et al., 2023).
Vision Large Language Models. VLLMs is an multimodal
extension of large language models, which can generate sen-
tences in an autoregressive manner, aiming to progressively
predict the probability distribution of the next token. Here,
the input prompt x contains both images and text prompts,
and the output contains text response y. A typical applica-
tion scenario for VLLMs is image captioning and Vision
Question Answering (VQA).
Direct Preference Optimization. Reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) has shown its effectiveness in fine-tuning LLMs
and align the LLMs behavior with human behavior. Typ-
ically, give an input x and an output text response y, a
language model policy πθ can produce a conditional dis-
tribution πθ(y | x). RL aims to maximize the average
reward of outputs generated by the policy, where the reward
function is defined as r(x, y). To further avoid overoptimiza-
tion (Gao et al., 2023) happens when directly optimizing
the reward function, the objective loss typically contains a
KL-divergence term to control the divergence between the
language model policy and its reference policy πref(y | x)
(e.g., the result after performing some supervised fine-tuning
on LLMs). Thus, the overall objective is formulated as:
max
πθ Ex∼D,y∼πθ(y|x)

r(x, y) −α log πθ(y | x)
πref(y | x)

(1)
where D is a dataset of prompts and β is a coefficient to
control both terms. However, optimizing the above loss term
with common strategies like proximal policy optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) is complex to tune.
Recently, direct preference optimization (DPO) (Rafailov
et al., 2023) simplifies the above process by leveraging pref-
erence data for optimization. Here, the preference data is
defined as D = {x(i), y(i)
w , y(i)
l }N
i=1, where y(i)
w and y(i)
l
rep-
resent preferred and dispreferred responses given an input
prompt x. Following a Bradley-Terry model (Bradley &
Terry, 1952), the probably of obtaining each preference pair
is:
p(yw ≻yl) = σ(r(x, yw) −r(x, yl)),
(2)
where we omit the superscript (i) for simplicity and σ(·) is
defined as a sigmoid function. In DPO, the optimization of
Eqn. (1) can be formulated as classification loss over the
preference data as:
LDPO(πθ; πref) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D

log σ

α log πθ(yw|x)
πref(yw|x) −α log πθ(yl|x)
πref(yl|x)

.
(3)
DPO enables learning πθ from a fixed dataset of preferences,
which is lightweight. However, the key challenge lies in gen-
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Prompt: Describe this image.
Answer: The picture shows a table
with ….. The sun is shining in from
outside and everything is peaceful.
Prompt: Describe this image.
Answer: The picture shows a table with a fruit knife (hallucinatory
entity)
…twenty oranges
(entity attributes)... The moon
(logical
relationship) is shining in from outside and everything is peaceful.
Preferred data
Injected dis-preferred 
response 𝑦!
"
Image
Distorted image
Hallucination
Injection
Step 1: Hallucinating Textual Responses
Step 2: Mitigating Inherent Hallucination Patterns
𝑦!
"
Triggered 
dis-preferred 
response
A fruit knife, apples (internal hallucination). …
Real-time 
triggering process
𝑦!
"
𝑦𝑤
>
𝑦!
#
LLaVA-1.5
Preference optimization
Final model
)
(
Figure 2. The framework of POVID. The preference generation process is divided into two steps: hallucinating textual responses and
trigger dispreference during training. Here, different types of triggered hallucinations are labeled in (types of hallucinations).
erating effective preference data for fine-tuning and aligning
image and text modalities in VLLMs.
3. Constructing Preferences to Aligning
Modalities in VLLMs
While preference learning approaches (e.g., DPO) facili-
tate the lightweight and stable training of VLLMs, they
require data in the form of preferences. In contrast to LLMs,
which support more freestyle generation in many scenarios,
VLLMs used in various applications, such as VQA or image
captioning, produce responses linked to input images. This
inherent image-centricity presents distinct challenges in the
preference data generation process for VLLMs, setting it
apart from the process in LLMs. Specifically, in VLLMs,
when comparing two responses, neither of which is correct
for the required task (e.g., image captioning), the model may
not be able to accurately align the image with the response.
To address this challenge,
we propose Preference
Optimization in VLLM with AI-Generated Dispreferences
(POVID), a novel approach aimed at better aligning im-
age and text modalities. As illustrated in Figure 2, POVID
leverages AI models to generate dispreferred responses with-
out the need for human labeling efforts. These generated
dispreferred responses, when combined with groundtruth
image descriptions (treated as preferred responses), form the
preference data pairs. Specifically, we employ two strate-
gies to generate the dispreferred response: (1) Firstly, we
manipulate the groundtruth text response by transforming
the groundtruth response into hallucinated response, which
serves as the dispreferred response; (2) Secondly, we in-
troduce distortion to the image input during the training
process, intending to trigger inherent hallucination patterns
within the VLLMs. These patterns are then formalized as
the dispreferred response, motivating the model to correct its
inherent dispreferred patterns. In the remainder of this sec-
tion, we will provide detailed explanations of both strategies
and demonstrate how to integrate them into the preference
training framework.
3.1. Hallucinating Textual Responses
In our first strategy, we aim to generate dispreferred hallu-
cinatory responses by hallucinating the groundtruth correct
response. We construct the hallucinatory response based
on a subset with 17K examples that are randomly sampled
from LLaVA-Instruct-150K (Liu et al., 2023b) dataset. Here,
the LLaVA-Instruct-150K datasets is used to train LLaVA
LLaVA with supervised fine-tuning. The 17K examples
includes various task types, including image captioning,
simple VQA and logical reasoning.
To construct the preferences, we treat the original answers
in the 17K examples as preferred responses. In terms of con-
structing dispreferred responses, we hallucinate the original
answers using GPT-4V (OpenAI, 2023). Here, we adopt
two hallucinating approaches tailored to different tasks:
I. Hallucinating Image Captioning Tasks. First, we hal-
lucinate the image captioning tasks by considering three
fundamental causes of hallucination in VLLMs: (1) Object
Co-occurrence: This phenomenon arises when the training
data contains spurious co-occurring patterns between ob-
jects, leading VLLMs to generate objects based on these
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
The image shows two men in a small boat on the water. One 
man is standing near the center of the boat, while the other is 
seated and rowing. The man wearing a headscarf is watching 
television, which is placed on the boat, adding an interesting 
element to the scene. There are a few other boats visible in the 
background, indicating that they might be in a city river or a 
busy waterway. The presence of the television in the boat 
adds a unique touch to their leisurely activity.
The image shows two men in a small boat on the water, 
equipped with fishing poles (hallucinatory entity) for their 
leisurely activity. One man is sitting near the center of the 
boat (entity attributes), fishing with his fishing pole 
(hallucinatory entity) , while the other is seated and rowing. 
They are both watching a television (logical relationship), 
which is placed on the boat, adding an interesting element to 
the scene. There are a few other boats visible in the 
background, indicating that they might be in a city river or a 
busy waterway. The presence of the fishing poles and the 
television in the boat adds a unique touch to their relaxing day 
on the water.
Preferred response
Dis-preferred response
Prompt: Describe this image.
Reasoning: The picture depicts a sunset scene in which I see 
a lake and open sky.
Answer: Yes, there is a person standing next to some blue 
water in the image.
Reasoning: The image depicts a sunset scene with a man 
standing on an open ice field (false reasoning, hallucinatory 
entities) with what appears to be a few buildings visible in 
the distance.
Answer: No, the person is standing next to a vast snowy 
field, not water (incorrect answer).
Prompt: Is there a person standing next 
to water in the image?
a. Hallucinating Image Captioning Tasks
b. Hallucinating Reasoning Tasks
Dis-preferred response
Preferred response
Figure 3. Two examples extracted from hallucinated image captioning tasks and reasoning tasks. Different types of hallucinations are
labeled in (types of hallucinations).
learned spurious correlations. In this context, we aim to
leverage GPT-4V to deduce object co-occurrence within the
given image and subsequently revise the original responses
accordingly; (2) Logical Relationships Between Entities:
This involves using GPT-4V to modify the relationships
between the original objects; (3) Incorrect Attributes: In
this case, we employ GPT-4V to alter the attributes of var-
ious objects, such as changing their colors. We illustrate
these three distinct hallucination scenarios with an example
provided in Figure 3(a). In addition, the prompt we used to
generate the dispreferred response is in Appendix A.2.
II. Hallucinating Reasoning Tasks. Secondly, when deal-
ing with tasks involving reasoning, such as VQA and logical
reasoning, we task GPT-4V with modifying the reasoning
process. This entails introducing errors related to logical
relationships, entity information, entity attributes, and more.
Additionally, we recommend that GPT-4V attempts to make
subtle changes to the reasoning process, ensuring it remains
independent of factual reasoning results, meaning that an
incorrect reasoning process may still yield correct results.
However, if the introduction of errors necessitates alterations
to the reasoning results, we instruct GPT-4V to adjust the
results accordingly. Likewise, in Figure 3(b), we provide an
example to demonstrate both the original and the generated
dispreferred responses. The prompt we used is detailed in
Appendix A.2.
3.2. Mitigating Inherent Hallucination Patterns
In addition to generating the dispreferred response using
powerful external AI models like GPT-4V, we also aim to
provoke inherent hallucination patterns within the VLLM
to be finetuned. Our second strategy introduces noise into
the image to trigger inherent hallucination patterns in the
VLLMs. This noise disrupts the VLLM’s understanding of
the image, leading it to produce uncertain responses that
rely more on textual context or acquired knowledge from
the training data. This occurs because, in the presence of
noisy images, the model tends to prioritize inherent object
associations over visual information. Notably, the noise step
should remain within a reasonable range, ensuring that the
image remains easily recognizable by humans. For example,
as depicted in Figure 4, when presented with the context
“There are a knife and ”, under specific noisy conditions, the
likelihood of “fork” surpasses that of “plate” (ground truth).
This may occur because “plate” is more likely to co-occur
with “fork” in the training data. With an increase in noise
steps, the term “pixel” becomes predominant, owing to the
noticeable noise patterns within the image. Consequently,
establishing an appropriate noise step to activate inherent
hallucination patterns is a reasonable approach.
To achieve this goal, we introduce diffusion noise into the
original image. We define the noise step as k, and the noised
image with step k can be expressed as follows:
x(k) =
q
¯ξk · x +
q
1 −¯ξk · ϵ,
(4)
where ¯ξt = Qk
i=0 ξi and ξk ∈(0, 1) is a hyperparameter
chosen prior to model training. Detailed settings can be
found in Appendix A.1. After obtaining the noised image,
in order to more effectively capture changes in inherent
hallucination patterns during the fine-tuning process of the
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Plate
<Input image>
Question: Describe this image.
Answer: In the image, there are knief and ___.
Fork
Pixel
Noise 
steps
0
500
999
Figure 4. Illustration of logits for the next token generation with
“In the image, there are knife and ”. This figure shows the predic-
tive uncertainty in token generation, emphasizing the influence of
visual cues from objects identified as “knife” and “plate”.
VLLM, we integrate the image noising process into the DPO
fine-tuning process. Specifically, for each input prompt
x, we take into account the dispreferred responses from
both the hallucinated text responses discussed in Section 3.1
and the responses triggered by distorted images. We then
reformulate the DPO loss as follows:
LPOVID(πθ; πref) = −E(x,yw,yl)∼D
"
log σ
 
α log πθ(yw|x)
πref(yw|x)
−

β1 log πθ(yt
l|x)
πref(yt
l|x) + β2 log πθ(yn
l |xn)
πref(yn
l |xn)
 !#
,
(5)
where α, β1 and β2 are coefficients that balance preferred
and dispreferred terms. yg
l represents the dispreferred re-
sponse generated using the approach outlined in Section 3.1.
Additionally, xn represents the noisy image, which triggers
the generation of the dispreferred response yn
l . It’s impor-
tant to note that for each token i in the sequence yn
l , the
value of yn
l,i is determined by selecting the maximum proba-
bility from the set πθ(· | xn, yw,<i). Here, each generated
token in the dispreferred response yn
l,i is conditioned on the
prior tokens from the preferred response yw,<i. This condi-
tioning allows us to control the reliability of the triggered
dispreferred response. As a result, we aim to capture the
most significant changes between the preferred and dispre-
ferred responses, since a substantial portion of dispreferred
response overlaps with preferred response. The training
process of our method is detailed in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 POVID Training Process
Require: D: Dataset of paired images and text context.
πθ: Parameters of the VLLM. πref: Parameters of the
reference model. α, β1, β2: Hyperparameters. ξk:
Noise hyperparameter for each timestep. T: Noise
Steps
1: AddNoiseToImage(x0, k)
ϵ ∼N(0, 1)
x(k) ←
p¯ξk · x0 +
p
1 −¯ξk · ϵ
2: Generate disprefered data and place it in D
3: Initialize reference policy πθ
4: for epochs do
5:
for (x, yw, yt
l) ∈D do
6:
for k = 0 to T do
7:
x(k) ←AddNoiseToImage(x, k)
8:
end for
9:
Update πθ through Eqn. (5)
10:
end for
11: end for
4. Experiment
In this section, we empirically investigate the effectiveness
of POVID in aligning image and text modalities in VLLMs
and reducing hallucination. We aim to answer the following
questions: (1) Can POVID effectively reduce hallucina-
tion in VLLMs compared to other preference fine-tuning
strategies? (2) Does POVID improve performance com-
pared to other benchmarks and tasks like VQA? (3) Can
hallucinating textual responses and image distortion ben-
efit performance? (4) How does POVID change attention
weights to align image and text modalities?
4.1. Experimental Setups
In this section, we briefly introduce the implementation
details, baselines, and evaluation settings.
Implementation Details. Following concurrent VLLM
preference tuning studies (Yu et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023d),
we have chosen LLaVA-1.5 (7B) as our backbone model
for all experiments and have applied POVID to fine-tune
LLaVA-1.5 (7B). The overall training process is divided
into two stages. In the first stage, we exclusively utilize the
preferences generated through the hallucinating textual re-
sponses, as discussed in Section 3.1, to fine-tune LLaVA-1.5
using DPO. In the second stage, we employ image distor-
tion to rectify the model’s inherent hallucinatory behaviors
using the loss defined in Eqn. (5). The first stage involves
training for 3 epochs, and the second stage for 1 epoch.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Table 1. Comparison between POVID and other preferences construction approaches in both hallucination and comprehensive evaluation
benchmarks. We bold the best results and underline the second best results.
Hallucination Benchmark
Comprehensive Benchmark
Method
CHAIRS ↓
CHAIRi ↓
POPE ↑
MMHal ↑
SciQA-IMG ↑
MM-Vet ↑
MMBench ↑
LLaVA-Bench ↑
LLaVA-1.5
66.8
12.7
85.90
2.42
66.8
30.5
63.0
63.4
+ Vlfeedback
56.3
11.4
83.72
2.62
66.2
31.2
63.9
62.1
+ Human-Preference
54.0
9.3
81.50
2.53
65.8
31.1
60.4
63.7
+ RLHF-V
44.6
7.9
86.20
2.59
67.1
30.9
63.6
65.4
POVID (ours)
31.8
5.4
86.90
2.69
68.8
31.8
64.9
68.7
Table 2. Comparison between POVID and other state-of-the-art VLLMs across both hallucination and comprehensive evaluation bench-
marks. We bold the best results and underline the second best results.
Method
Vision Encoder
Language Model
CHAIRS ↓
CHAIRi ↓
POPE ↑
MMHal ↑
Avg. ranking ↓
InstructBLIP
ViT-g (1.3B)
Vicuna (7B)
40.0
8.0
77.83
2.10
3.00
Qwen-VL-Chat
ViT-G (1.9B)
Qwen (7B)
48.2
9.1
87.07
2.89
2.50
mPLUG-Owl2
ViT-L (0.3B)
LLaMA (7B)
54.4
12.0
86.20
2.17
4.00
POVID (ours)
ViT-L (0.3B)
Vicuna (7B)
31.8
5.4
86.29
2.69
1.50
Method
Vision Encoder
Language Model
SciQA-IMG ↑
MM-Vet ↑
MMBench ↑
LLaVA-Bench ↑
Avg. ranking ↓
InstructBLIP
ViT-g (1.3B)
Vicuna (7B)
60.5
26.2
36.0
60.9
4.00
Qwen-VL-Chat
ViT-G (1.9B)
Qwen (7B)
68.2
41.2
60.6
67.7
2.25
mPLUG-Owl2
ViT-L (0.3B)
LLaMA (7B)
64.5
36.2
64.5
59.9
3.00
POVID (ours)
ViT-L (0.3B)
Vicuna (7B)
68.8
31.8
64.9
68.7
1.75
The entire training process requires a single A100 80GB
GPU and takes approximately 6 hours. For a more detailed
description, please refer to Appendix A.1.
Baseline Approaches. We first compare the proposed ap-
proach with other VLLM preference tuning methods, which
include Silkie (Li et al., 2023d), LLaVA-RLHF (Sun et al.,
2023), and RLHF-V (Yu et al., 2023b). These methods
share a common goal of enhancing model performance by
creating curated datasets and subsequently applying pref-
erence tuning techniques to fine-tune the model based on
these datasets. To ensure a fair and equitable comparison,
we utilize the same curated datasets employed by these
approaches and apply DPO to fine-tune LLaVA-1.5 (7B).
Furthermore, we compare the performance with other open
source VLLMs, including InstructBLIP (Dai et al., 2023),
Qwen-VL-Chat (Bai et al., 2023) and mPLUG-Owl2 (Ye
et al., 2023).
Evaluation Benchmark. To evaluate the performance of
POVID and other baselines, we first adopt VLLM hallucina-
tion evaluation benchmarks, including CHAIR (Rohrbach
et al., 2018), POPE (Li et al., 2023f), and MMHal (Sun et al.,
2023). Here, CHAIR, including CHAIRS and CHAIRI, is
a metric used in image captioning tasks to evaluate the ac-
curacy of object descriptions in captions. It compares the
objects mentioned in a caption with those present in the
image. MMHal (Sun et al., 2023) assesses hallucinations
and response informativeness by utilizing GPT-4V to com-
pare model output with human responses and various object
labels, determining the scores accordingly. POPE (Li et al.,
2023f) uses a set of binary classification tasks, prompting
VLLMs with simple Yes-or-No questions about the exis-
tence of certain objects in images.
We further evaluate all approaches on comprehensive VLLM
evaluation benchmarks, including SciQA-IMG (Lu et al.,
2022), MME (Fu et al., 2023), MMbench (Liu et al., 2023c),
MM-Vet (Yu et al., 2023c) and LLaVA-bench(Liu et al.,
2023b). Each benchmark contains tasks to evaluate percep-
tion, cognition, and reasoning abilities of VLLMs. More
detailed descriptions of these baselines are in Appendix B.
4.2. Results
Comparison with Different Preferences in VLLMs. In
Table 1, we present the results of a comparison between
various VLLM preferences, evaluating both hallucination
and comprehensive benchmarks. Firstly, in the hallucina-
tion benchmarks, POVID effectively enhances performance
by creating dispreferred preferences through textual data
manipulation and image distortion. We achieve a signifi-
cant improvement of 31.78% across all hallucination bench-
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Table 3. Results of ablation study. Text disprefer means we only using hallucinated textual response to train DPO. Image distortion means
that we use distorted images to trigger inherent hallucination patterns.
Hallucination Benchmarks
Comprehensive Benchmarks
Text disprefer
Image distortion
CHAIRS ↓
CHAIRi ↓
POPE ↑
MMHal ↑
SciQA-IMG ↑
MM-Vet ↑
MMBench ↑
LLaVA-Bench ↑
×
×
66.8
12.7
85.90
2.42
66.2
31.2
63.9
62.1
✓
×
39.6
6.3
86.04
2.65
67.2
30.9
64.7
67.5
×
✓
50.4
9.6
85.19
2.54
66.9
30.7
64.3
66.9
✓
✓
31.8
5.4
86.90
2.69
68.8
31.8
64.9
68.7
marks, effectively reducing hallucinations in the generated
responses. This outcome aligns with our expectations, as
constructing dispreferences from the ground-truth correct re-
sponses maximally enables the model to discern differences
between correct and incorrect responses while optimizing
alignment between the image and text modalities within
the model. Moreover, in more comprehensive evaluation
benchmarks, which encompass not only factuality and hal-
lucination assessment but also other aspects, POVID contin-
ues to demonstrate superior performance when compared to
other preference data collection methods. This further indi-
cates our model’s capacity to enhance VLLM performance
through improved modality alignment.
Comparison with Open-Sourced VLLMs Models. We
present a comparison between POVID and other open-
sourced VLLMs in Table 2. Although various approaches
utilize different image and text encoders, POVID outper-
forms other popular VLLMs in five out of eight bench-
marks. In contrast, the second-best baseline, Qwen-VL-
Chat, achieves the best performance in only two out of eight
benchmarks. This underscores the superiority of POVID
and further corroborates its effectiveness in aligning image
and text modalities to improve the performance of VLLMs.
4.3. Analysis
In this section, we provide a comprehensive analysis to
demonstrate how different components contribute to the
performance of POVID and illustrate how POVID enhances
overall performance.
Ablation Studies. To further demonstrate the essential role
of the key components of POVID in contributing to perfor-
mance improvement, we conducted ablation experiments
on both hallucination and comprehensive benchmarks, and
present the results in Table 3. In this ablation study, we
evaluate the effectiveness of two aspects: (1) hallucinating
groundtruth responses and (2) image distortion. According
to the results, we initially observe that image distortion can
enhance performance across all benchmarks. This indicates
its effectiveness in aligning multimodalities by compelling
the model to rectify inherent hallucination patterns. Ad-
ditionally, generating dispreference from groundtruth re-
sponses significantly enhances performance, underscoring
the effectiveness of the AI-generated dispreference strategy.
Finally, when combining both strategies, POVID achieves
the best performance, further affirming its effectiveness in
enhancing VLLMs through improved modality alignment.
Fine-grained Performance Analysis. Table 4 presents a
fine-grained performance analysis of different preference
collection strategies on the LLaVA-Bench benchmark. This
analysis encompasses a spectrum of multi-modal reasoning
and perception dimensions, such as Conversation, Detail
Description, and Complex Reasoning. According to Table 4,
it is evident that, when compared with other preference data
collection approaches, POVID excels in image captioning
and providing detailed descriptions for a given image. This
outcome aligns with our expectations, as our training data
includes various long-form captions, and such comprehen-
sive preference comparisons result in improved alignment
and stronger image captioning results. Moreover, across
other categories, our approach consistently outperforms al-
ternative preference collection strategies, underscoring its
effectiveness across various tasks.
Table 4. Fine-grained performance comparison of various models
on LLaVA-Bench, where we adopt the following abbreviation:
Convo for Conversation, Captioning for Detail description, Rea-
soning for Complex reasoning.
Method
Convo
Captioning
Reasoning
Overall
LLaVA-1.5
53.3
53.4
79.6
63.4
+ Vlfeedback
51.3
49.3
78.5
62.1
+ Human-Preference
49.6
43.3
81.3
63.7
+ RLHF-V
55.8
56.1
80.3
65.4
POVID (ours)
55.9
60.1
81.5
68.7
Modality Alignment Analysis. We assess the impact of
POVID on modality alignment by comparing the attention
maps generated by POVID with those of the original LLaVA-
1.5 model, with a specific focus on image captioning and
VQA tasks. We illustrate two cases in Figure 5, where these
attention maps reveal the distribution of attention scores
assigned to generated textual tokens within the input image-
text sequence throughout the VLLM’s output generation
phase. Our findings reveal that the original LLaVA-1.5
model tends to overemphasize the context of the text, which
can result in hallucinations. In contrast, POVID increas-
ingly prioritizes attention towards the image, indicating a
strong alignment between image and text modalities. One
potential explanation for this phenomenon is that, through
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
The image shows a man sitting down and brushing 
the teeth of a cat with his fingers. The cat appears 
to be reacting to or accepting the tooth brushing 
process. The man and the cat are the main focus of 
the scene.
The setting appears to be indoors, as there is a 
person visible in the image along with the close 
interaction between the man and the cat. The cat is 
located near the center of the scene, while the man 
is positioned on the left side of the image.
Visual tokens
Textual tokens
Textual tokens
LLaVA-1.5
POVID (Ours)
LLaVA 1.5
Prompt: Describe this image.
Visual tokens
The image features a person brushing an open mouth 
cat‘s teeth with a small electric toothbrush. They are in 
a kitchen (hallucinatory entity) setting, focused on 
maintaining good oral hygiene. An oven (hallucinatory 
entity) is visible in the background, adding to the cozy 
kitchen environment entity attributes. 
There is also a tie (hallucinatory entity)  in the scene, 
likely placed on or hung up nearby, possibly indicating 
that someone's clothing is being attended to or is 
hanging out to be worn.
No, there is no fruit knife in the picture. There are 
oranges and a glass of orange juice in the image.
Yes (incorrect answer), there is a fruit 
knife(hallucinatory entities) in the picture.
Visual tokens
Visual tokens
Textual tokens
Textual tokens
POVID (ours)
LLaVA-1.5
POVID (Ours)
LLaVA 1.5
Prompt: Is there someone in this picture?
POVID (ours)
Captioning Task
VQA Task
Figure 5. Comparison of attention map between POVID and LLaVA-1.5 at different tasks. The red box region is labeled with the image
attentions that can be significantly improved by POVID.
a comparison between the ground truth and the generated
dispreferred data, along with the mitigation of internal hal-
lucination patterns, POVID redirects the VLLM’s attention,
leading to a greater focus on the image tokens.
5. Related Work
VLLMs and VLLM Hallucination. The advent of autore-
gressive large-scale language models (LLMs), highlighted
in works by (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Taori et al., 2023), has
led to the development of Vision-Large Language Models
(VLLMs). To align the image and text modalities, recent
research has concentrated on instruction tuning (Li et al.,
2023a), scaling up training dataset (Jia et al., 2021), and
better alignment between image and text with local feature
enhancement (Cha et al., 2023). These advancements have
successfully combined LLMs with image inputs and ex-
cel in image comprehension. However, such VLLMs are
not perfect and even suffer from “hallucinations”, generat-
ing outputs that may not accurately or faithfully represent
the content of a user-provided image. There are various
sources of hallucinations in VLLMs, including biased data
(Chuang et al., 2023; Tu et al., 2023), insufficient train-
ing (Chen et al., 2023), and imperfect inference (Huang
et al., 2023). Recently, addressing hallucination in LVLMs
is primarily achieved through various techniques such as
decoding approaches (Leng et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023),
post-processing (Zhou et al., 2023; Yin et al., 2023) and
the construction of higher-quality dataset (Liu et al., 2023a;
Li et al., 2023e). While these approaches can mitigate hal-
lucination to some extent, they often fail to directly guide
VLLMs to align image and text modalities.
Preference Alignment Aligning with human preferences
for large models has emerged as a critical issue due to the
limitations imposed by safety and ethical considerations
in real-world applications. Preference alignment can be
broadly categorized into two main approaches: alignment
through feedback, which encompasses both human (Bai
et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023) and AI-generated feed-
back (Lee et al., 2023) and alignment via prompt guid-
ance (Wei et al., 2022). Initial investigations into preference
alignment for VLLMs have recently been conducted. Sun
et al. (2023) introduced LLaVA-RLHF, which utilizes a
preference dataset annotated by humans to decrease halluci-
nations in LLaVA. Li et al. (2023d) proposed a method for
distilling preferences into VLLMs to enhance their ability
to generate relevant and accurate responses based on visual
context. Yu et al. (2023b) collected human preferences in
the form of segment-level corrections to hallucinatory con-
tent and optimizing the model’s behavior based on dense,
direct feedback. While these initial results are promising,
these works heavily rely on the traditional preference data
generation process in LLMs, which generate both preferred
and dispreferred responses, but none of them are guaran-
teed to be correct. In VLLMs, when both responses prove
incorrect for the given task, accurately aligning the image
with the correct generated response becomes challenging. In
contrast, POVID directly generates dispreferred responses,
effectively addressing this challenge.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce a novel approach, Preference
Optimization in VLLM with AI-Generated Dispreferences
(POVID) to address the challenges in modality alignment
for large vision-language models. In POVID, we adopt
two strategies to generate disprefered responses: first, we
use synthetic data from GPT-4V to inject plausible halluci-
nations into the correct answer. Second, we use distorted
images to trigger the inherent hallucination behavior of
the VLLM. Then both of these answers are integrated into
an RLHF framework via Direct Preference Optimization.
Empirical evaluations across multiple benchmarks reveal
that POVID not only mitigates hallucination effectively but
boosts the overall performance of model.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Broader Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of machine learning and multimodal learning. There are
many potential societal consequences of our work, none
which we feel must be specifically highlighted here.
Acknowledgement
We thank the Center for AI Safety for supporting our com-
puting needs.
References
Antol, S., Agrawal, A., Lu, J., Mitchell, M., Batra, D.,
Zitnick, C. L., and Parikh, D. Vqa: Visual question
answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pp. 2425–2433, 2015.
Bai, J., Bai, S., Yang, S., Wang, S., Tan, S., Wang, P., Lin, J.,
Zhou, C., and Zhou, J. Qwen-vl: A frontier large vision-
language model with versatile abilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., Das-
Sarma, N., Drain, D., Fort, S., Ganguli, D., Henighan, T.,
et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with rein-
forcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.
Bradley, R. A. and Terry, M. E. Rank analysis of incom-
plete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons.
Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Cha, J., Kang, W., Mun, J., and Roh, B. Honeybee: Locality-
enhanced projector for multimodal llm. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.06742, 2023.
Chen, G., Shen, L., Shao, R., Deng, X., and Nie, L. Lion:
Empowering multimodal large language model with dual-
level visual knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11860,
2023.
Chuang, C.-Y., Jampani, V., Li, Y., Torralba, A., and Jegelka,
S. Debiasing vision-language models via biased prompts.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00070, 2023.
Cui, C., Zhou, Y., Yang, X., Wu, S., Zhang, L., Zou, J.,
and Yao, H. Holistic analysis of hallucination in gpt-4v
(ision): Bias and interference challenges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.03287, 2023.
Dai, W., Li, J., Li, D., Tiong, A. M. H., Zhao, J., Wang,
W., Li, B., Fung, P., and Hoi, S. Instructblip: Towards
general-purpose vision-language models with instruction
tuning, 2023.
Dewangan, V., Choudhary, T., Chandhok, S., Priyadarshan,
S., Jain, A., Singh, A. K., Srivastava, S., Jatavallabhula,
K. M., and Krishna, K. M. Talk2bev: Language-enhanced
bird’s-eye view maps for autonomous driving. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.02251, 2023.
Fu, C., Chen, P., Shen, Y., Qin, Y., Zhang, M., Lin, X., Yang,
J., Zheng, X., Li, K., Sun, X., et al. Mme: A comprehen-
sive evaluation benchmark for multimodal large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13394, 2023.
Gao, L., Schulman, J., and Hilton, J. Scaling laws for reward
model overoptimization. 2023.
Huang, Q., Dong, X., Zhang, P., Wang, B., He, C., Wang,
J., Lin, D., Zhang, W., and Yu, N. Opera: Alleviating
hallucination in multi-modal large language models via
over-trust penalty and retrospection-allocation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.17911, 2023.
Jia, C., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Chen, Y.-T., Parekh, Z., Pham, H.,
Le, Q., Sung, Y.-H., Li, Z., and Duerig, T. Scaling up
visual and vision-language representation learning with
noisy text supervision. In International conference on
machine learning, pp. 4904–4916. PMLR, 2021.
Lee, H., Phatale, S., Mansoor, H., Lu, K., Mesnard, T.,
Bishop, C., Carbune, V., and Rastogi, A. Rlaif: Scal-
ing reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai
feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267, 2023.
Leng, S., Zhang, H., Chen, G., Li, X., Lu, S., Miao, C., and
Bing, L. Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-
language models through visual contrastive decoding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16922, 2023.
Li, C., Ge, Y., Li, D., and Shan, Y. Vision-language instruc-
tion tuning: A review and analysis. 2023a.
Li, C., Wong, C., Zhang, S., Usuyama, N., Liu, H., Yang, J.,
Naumann, T., Poon, H., and Gao, J. Llava-med: Training
a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in
one day. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00890, 2023b.
Li, J., Li, D., Xiong, C., and Hoi, S. Blip: Bootstrapping
language-image pre-training for unified vision-language
understanding and generation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pp. 12888–12900. PMLR,
2022.
Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., and Hoi, S.
Blip-2: Boot-
strapping language-image pre-training with frozen im-
age encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.12597, 2023c.
Li, L., Xie, Z., Li, M., Chen, S., Wang, P., Chen, L., Yang,
Y., Wang, B., and Kong, L. Silkie: Preference distilla-
tion for large visual language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10665, 2023d.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Li, L., Yin, Y., Li, S., Chen, L., Wang, P., Ren, S., Li, M.,
Yang, Y., Xu, J., Sun, X., et al. M3it: A large-scale
dataset towards multi-modal multilingual instruction tun-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04387, 2023e.
Li, Y., Du, Y., Zhou, K., Wang, J., Zhao, W. X., and Wen,
J.-R.
Evaluating object hallucination in large vision-
language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10355,
2023f.
Liu, F., Lin, K., Li, L., Wang, J., Yacoob, Y., and Wang, L.
Aligning large multi-modal model with robust instruction
tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14565, 2023a.
Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., and Lee, Y. J. Visual instruction
tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08485, 2023b.
Liu, Y., Duan, H., Zhang, Y., Li, B., Zhang, S., Zhao, W.,
Yuan, Y., Wang, J., He, C., Liu, Z., et al. Mmbench: Is
your multi-modal model an all-around player?
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.06281, 2023c.
Lu, P., Mishra, S., Xia, T., Qiu, L., Chang, K.-W., Zhu,
S.-C., Tafjord, O., Clark, P., and Kalyan, A. Learn to
explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for
science question answering. In The 36th Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. ArXiv, abs/2303.08774,
2023.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.
08774.
Rafailov, R., Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Manning, C. D.,
Ermon, S., and Finn, C. Direct preference optimization:
Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.18290.
Rohrbach, A., Hendricks, L. A., Burns, K., Darrell, T., and
Saenko, K. Object hallucination in image captioning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02156, 2018.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal policy optimization algorithms,
2017.
Sun, Z., Shen, S., Cao, S., Liu, H., Li, C., Shen, Y., Gan, C.,
Gui, L.-Y., Wang, Y.-X., Yang, Y., et al. Aligning large
multimodal models with factually augmented rlhf. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.14525, 2023.
Taori, R., Gulrajani, I., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Li,
X., Guestrin, C., Liang, P., and Hashimoto, T. B.
Stanford
alpaca:
An
instruction-following
llama
model.
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux,
M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi`ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E.,
Azhar, F., et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-
guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.
Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi,
A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P.,
Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
2023b.
Tu, H., Cui, C., Wang, Z., Zhou, Y., Zhao, B., Han, J., Zhou,
W., Yao, H., and Xie, C. How many unicorns are in this
image? a safety evaluation benchmark for vision llms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16101, 2023.
Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., and Erhan, D. Show and
tell: A neural image caption generator. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 3156–3164, 2015.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F.,
Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
24824–24837, 2022.
Ye, Q., Xu, H., Xu, G., Ye, J., Yan, M., Zhou, Y., Wang, J.,
Hu, A., Shi, P., Shi, Y., et al. mplug-owl: Modulariza-
tion empowers large language models with multimodality.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14178, 2023.
Yin, S., Fu, C., Zhao, S., Xu, T., Wang, H., Sui, D., Shen, Y.,
Li, K., Sun, X., and Chen, E. Woodpecker: Hallucination
correction for multimodal large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.16045, 2023.
Yu, T., Yao, Y., Zhang, H., He, T., Han, Y., Cui, G., Hu, J.,
Liu, Z., Zheng, H.-T., Sun, M., and Chua, T.-S. Rlhf-v:
Towards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment from
fine-grained correctional human feedback. arxiv, 2023a.
Yu, T., Yao, Y., Zhang, H., He, T., Han, Y., Cui, G., Hu,
J., Liu, Z., Zheng, H.-T., Sun, M., et al. Rlhf-v: To-
wards trustworthy mllms via behavior alignment from
fine-grained correctional human feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00849, 2023b.
Yu, W., Yang, Z., Li, L., Wang, J., Lin, K., Liu, Z., Wang,
X., and Wang, L.
Mm-vet: Evaluating large multi-
modal models for integrated capabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.02490, 2023c.
Zhao, Z., Wang, B., Ouyang, L., Dong, X., Wang, J., and
He, C. Beyond hallucinations: Enhancing lvlms through
hallucination-aware direct preference optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.16839, 2023.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Zhou, Y., Cui, C., Yoon, J., Zhang, L., Deng, Z., Finn, C.,
Bansal, M., and Yao, H. Analyzing and mitigating object
hallucination in large vision-language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.00754, 2023.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
A. Appendix.
A.1. Training Setup
Training hyperparameters are shown in Table 5. For the first phase, we trained for 3 epochs, and for the second phase, the
training was conducted for 1 epoch. Training for 20 hours on one A100 80G GPU. For the second phase, we adjust the
diffusion noise level, symbolized by ξ through a specific formula: ξ = Sigmoid(lt) × (0.5 × 10−2 −10−5) + 10−5, where
ϵ is drawn from a normal distribution.
A.2. Construction of the Dispreference Dataset
This section details the prompts utilized to compile the dataset focusing on dispreferences, specifically within the realms
of image captioning and reasoning tasks. The prompts are designed to elicit responses that reveal dispreference patterns,
categorized into two main types: image captioning tasks intended to provoke imaginative descriptions, and reasoning tasks
aimed at stimulating inferential thought processes. These prompts, central to our methodology, are enumerated in Table 6,
offering a comprehensive view of the data generation framework.
Table 5. Training hyperparameters.
Hyperparameters
lora r
128
lora alpha
256
lora target
all
mm projector lr
2e-5
Batch size
1
Learning rate
1e-7
model max length
1024
noise step (only for internal preference optimization)
500
B. Details about baselines
For the assessment of multitasking, MME (Fu et al., 2023) is a comprehensive evaluation tool for MLLMs, which is designed
to measure both perception and cognition abilities across 14 sub-tasks. MMBench (Liu et al., 2023c) is characterized by its
approach to assessing both perception and reasoning abilities, categorized into top-level dimensions in the ability taxonomy.
This benchmark includes different levels of abilities, each including specific aspects of perception and reasoning. MM-Vet
(Yu et al., 2023c) focuses on six core capabilities for evaluation: recognition, knowledge, optical character recognition
(OCR), spatial awareness, language generation, and math. These capabilities cover a wide range of functions from general
visual recognition to specific tasks like arithmetic problem-solving. LLaVA-Bench (Liu et al., 2023b) assesses models in
more complex tasks and their adaptability to new domains. It consists of 24 diverse images, encompassing a variety of
scenes like indoor and outdoor settings, memes, paintings, and sketches. Each image in LLaVA-Bench is paired with a
detailed, manually crafted description and a carefully chosen set of questions, totaling 60 questions. This setup aims to
provide a thorough and varied evaluation of the models’ capabilities.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Aligning Modalities in Vision Large Language Models via Preference Fine-tuning
Table 6. Two types of prompts to GPT4V (The format of the obtained data is {image, prefer data, disprefer data}).
Prompts for hallucinating image captioning tasks:
Help me generate one highly confusing response based on the image and the standard caption in the Question-Answer
Pair.
*****************************************
Question-answer Pair:
Q: {question}
A: {answer}
Requirements:
(1) The generated caption is generally similar to the given A, with the same main meaning; (2) You can refer to the
following errors to generate the wrong caption (1. The wrong caption can contain some co-occurring objects, which are
prone to appear in such scenarios but do not appear in the image; 2. The wrong caption can be an error in the number
of entities or the logical relationships between entities; 3. The attributes of entities in the caption can also be modified,
such as color, appearance, etc.) (3) Compared to the original caption A, the caption you modified is incorrect based on
the provided image.
*****************************************
Output Format:
Answer: your answer
Prompts for hallucinating reasoning tasks:
Now, please help me generate new answers with hallucination errors based on the image, question, and answer provided.
There are two cases now:
1. If the given question and answer are short and do not require logical reasoning, then modify the answer to a
hallucination error answer, such as some quantity errors or entity and property errors.
2. If the entire question requires logical reasoning, then help me reorganize the answers based on the given image,
questions, and answers into the format “Reason: xxx, Result: xxx” (Answer 1). Modify the reasons by introducing
errors related to logical relationships, entity information, entity attributes, etc. If the error in the reason would lead to a
new result, modify the result accordingly. If the error does not lead to a new result, keep the original result. Similarly,
organize it in the format “Reason: xxx, Result: xxx” (Answer 2).
*****************************************
Question-answer Pair:
Q: {question}
A: {answer}
Requirements:
(1) The generated wrong answer and reasoning process should be combined with the image and be misleading..
*****************************************
Output Format:
Answer: your answer
13
