
===== PAGE 1 =====
ChatCAD: Interactive Computer-Aided Diagnosis on Medical Image using
Large Language Models
Sheng Wang1,2,3
Zihao Zhao1
Xi Ouyang3
Qian Wang1
Dinggang Shen1,3
1ShanghaiTech University
2Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3United Imaging Intelligence
Disease
Classifier
Lesion
Segmentor
Report
Generator
Input: medical exam image 
and chief complaint text
fever with chills, 
malaise, 
loss of appetite, 
and myalgias
Prompt text
0.238
0.086
0.923
...
0.167
“... airspace 
consolidation is 
noted within the 
left lower lobe 
concerning for 
pneumonia...”
Network A’s diagnosis 
prediction: pneumonia.
Network B’s segmentation
result: 35% of lung is 
inflected.
Network C generated a 
report:“ ... airspace 
consolidation is noted 
within the left lower 
lobe concerning for 
pneumonia...”.
Refine the report based on results
from Network A and Network B
Trainable
Frozen
Large 
Language 
Model
(e.g., 
ChatGPT)
Online
“...have been provided and 
show 35% of the left lower 
lobe to be infected, 
consistent with a diagnosis 
of pneumonia...”
What medicine should I take?
...In general, bacterial 
pneumonia is treated with 
antibiotics, while viral 
pneumonia is treated with 
antiviral medications. Pain 
relievers and cough medicines 
can also be used to relieve 
symptoms...
A
B
C
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed strategy. The image is processed by various networks to generate diverse outputs, which are then
transformed into text descriptions. The descriptions, served as a link between visual and linguistic information, are combined as inputs to
a large language model (LLM). With its ability to reason and its knowledge of medical ﬁeld, the LLM can provide a condensed report and
offer interactive explanations and medical recommendations based on the given image.
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have recently demon-
strated their potential in clinical applications, providing
valuable medical knowledge and advice. For example, a
large dialog LLM like ChatGPT has successfully passed
part of the US medical licensing exam. However, LLMs cur-
rently have difﬁculty processing images, making it challeng-
ing to interpret information from medical images, which are
rich in information that supports clinical decisions. On the
other hand, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) networks for
medical images have seen signiﬁcant success in the med-
ical ﬁeld by using advanced deep-learning algorithms to
support clinical decision-making.
This paper presents a
method for integrating LLMs into medical-image CAD net-
works. The proposed framework uses LLMs to enhance the
output of multiple CAD networks, such as diagnosis net-
works, lesion segmentation networks, and report generation
networks, by summarizing and reorganizing the informa-
tion presented in natural language text format. The goal
is to merge the strengths of LLMs’ medical domain knowl-
edge and logical reasoning with the vision understanding
capability of existing medical-image CAD models to cre-
ate a more user-friendly and understandable system for pa-
tients compared to conventional CAD systems. In the future,
LLM’s medical knowledge can be also used to improve the
performance of vision-based medical-image CAD models.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are advanced artiﬁcial
intelligence systems that have been trained on vast amounts
of text data [5, 22]. These models use deep learning tech-
niques to generate human-like responses, making them use-
ful for a variety of tasks such as language translation, ques-
tion answering, and text generation. LLMs like OpenAI’s
GPT-3 [3] have shown remarkable results in natural lan-
guage processing and have the potential to revolutionize
various industries, including marketing, education, and cus-
tomer service. The ability of LLMs to process and under-
stand large amounts of data has made them highly sought
after for solving complex problems.
In the medical do-
main, LLMs have demonstrated their potential as valuable
tools for providing medical knowledge and advice. For in-
stance, a large dialog-based LLM, such as ChatGPT [17],
has demonstrated remarkable results in a critical evalua-
1
arXiv:2302.07257v1  [cs.CV]  14 Feb 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
What medicine should I take?
For bacterial pneumonia, 
antibiotics are the most common 
form of treatment. Some 
commonly used antibiotics for 
pneumonia include penicillin, 
macrolides, fluoroquinolones, 
and beta-lactams.
If your pneumonia is caused by 
a virus, antibiotics are not 
effective. Instead, antiviral 
medications, such as 
oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or 
zanamivir (Relenza), if your 
pneumonia is caused by the flu.
What’s airspace consolidation 
Airspace consolidation may 
refer to the appearance of a 
particular area of the lung 
where there is a buildup of 
fluid, air, or other material 
that is causing the lung 
tissue to collapse. This can 
result in a decreased amount 
of air in the lung, which can 
make it difficult for the 
patient to breathe. Airspace 
consolidation can be a sign of 
various lung conditions, such 
as pneumonia, lung abscess...
I lost smell for more than
a week, why?
The loss of smell may be due 
to inflammation and swelling 
in the nasal passages, which 
can interfere with the 
ability to detect odors. 
Additionally, the infection 
can also spread to the 
olfactory nerve, which is 
responsible for transmitting 
smells from the nose to the 
brain.
<summarized report>
<questions from patient>
<Network x:...>
Revise the report based on results
from Network x.
Figure 2. Interactive CAD with LLMs. This example uses the ChatGPT as LLM.
tion of its medical knowledge. ChatGPT has successfully
passed part of the US medical licensing exams, showcasing
its potential to augment medical professionals in delivering
care. Inspired by their remarkable progress in natural lan-
guage processing, it is an interesting topic to integrate the
LLMs to understand visual information in computer vision
tasks. Processing images involves understanding the spatial
relationships between objects, recognizing patterns and tex-
tures, and extracting features that describe the objects in an
image. These tasks require a deep understanding of visual
information, which is challenging for LLMs that have been
primarily trained on text data. This limitation presents a ma-
jor challenge in the medical ﬁeld, where images play a cru-
cial role in supporting clinical decisions. Medical images,
such as X-rays, CT scans and MRIs, are rich in information
that can provide critical insights into a patient’s condition.
However, LLMs currently struggle to interpret and extract
information from these images, limiting their ability to fully
support clinical decision-making processes.
As the “pure” computer vision method, medical-image
computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) networks have achieved
signiﬁcant success in supporting clinical decision-making
processes in the medical ﬁeld [24]. These networks lever-
age advanced deep learning algorithms to analyze medi-
cal images and provide valuable insights to support clini-
cal decision-making. CAD networks have been designed
speciﬁcally to handle the complexities of visual information
in medical images, making them well-suited for tasks such
as disease diagnosis [30], lesion segmentation [35], and re-
port generation. These networks have been trained on large
amounts of medical image data, allowing them to learn to
recognize complex patterns and relationships in visual in-
formation that are speciﬁc to the medical ﬁeld.
The aim of this paper is to provide a scheme that com-
bines the strength of LLMs and CAD models.
In this
scheme, namely ChatCAD, the image is ﬁrst fed into multi-
ple networks, i.e., an image classiﬁcation network, a lesion
segmentation network, and a report generation network as
depicted in Figure 1. The results produced by classiﬁca-
tion or segmentation are a vector or a mask, which can not
be understood by LLMs. Therefore, we transform these re-
sults into the text representation form as shown in the mid-
dle panel of Figure 1. These text-form results will then be
concatenated together as a prompt “Revise the report based
on results from Network A and Network B” for the LLM.
The LLM then summarizes the results from all the CAD
networks.
As the example in this ﬁgure, the reﬁned re-
port combines the ﬁndings from all three networks to pro-
vide a clear and concise summary of the patient’s condi-
tion, highlighting the presence of pneumonia and the ex-
tent of the infection in the left lower lobe. In this way,
the LLM could correct errors in the generated report based
on the results from CAD networks. Our experiment shows
that our scheme could improve the diagnosis performance
score of the state-of-the-art report generation methods by
16.42%. A major beneﬁt of our approach is the utilization
of LLM’s robust logical reasoning capabilities to combine
various decisions from multiple models. This allows us to
ﬁne-tune each model individually. For instance, in response
to an emergency outbreak such as COVID-19, we can add
a pneumonia classiﬁcation model (differentiating between
community-acquired pneumonia and COVID-19 [19]) us-
ing very few cases without affecting the other models. Since
classiﬁers are usually less data-hungry than other models,
we mark it with “trainable” (green) in Figure 1.
Another advantage of bootstraping LLMs to CAD mod-
els is that their extensive and robust medical knowledge can
be leveraged to provide interactive explanations and medi-
cal advice as we illustrate on Figure 2. For example, based
on an image and generated report, patients can inquire about
appropriate treatment options (second panel) or deﬁne med-
ical terms such as “airspace consolidation” (third panel). Or
with patient’s chief complaint (forth panel), LLMs can ex-
plain why such symptom happens. In this manner, patients
can gain a deeper understanding of their symptoms, diag-
nosis, and treatment more efﬁciently. It can efﬁciently help
patients to reduce consultation costs with clinical experts.
As the performances of CAD models and LLMs become
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
increasingly improved in the future, the proposed scheme
has the potential to improve the quality of radiology reports
and enhance the feasibility of online healthcare services.
2. Related Works
2.1. Large Language Models
Recent advances in Transformer architecture [28] and
computing power have enabled the training of large lan-
guage models with billions of parameters, leading to a sig-
niﬁcant improvement in their ability to summarize, trans-
late, predict and generate human-like text [3,23,25].
Several domain-speciﬁc LLMs have been developed us-
ing general-purpose model weight and training schemes.
BioBERT [13] and PubMedBERT [8] are examples of
BERT [5] models trained on PubMed for biomedical data,
while ClinicalBERT [2] was further trained on the MIMIC
dataset and outperformed its predecessor. Med-PaLM [25]
was developed in late 2022 using curated biomedical cor-
pora and human feedback, and showed promising results,
including a 67.6% accuracy on the MedQA exam. Chat-
GPT, which was not given supplementary medical training,
passed all three parts of the USMLE and achieved over 50%
accuracy across all exams and surpassed 60% accuracy in
the majority of them [12].
2.2. Vision-Language Model
A popular method of converting visual information into
language is through image captioning. Deep learning-based
image caption models [9, 33] can generate descriptive and
coherent captions using large datasets such as Microsoft
COCO and Flickr 30K. In medical image analysis, image
captioning methods are employed to generate exam im-
age reports.
For example, Li et al. [14] implement ex-
plicit medical abnormality graph learning for report gener-
ation. Zhang et al. [34] utilize a pre-constructed knowledge
graph based on disease topics, respectively. Another line
of research [4, 29] learns cross-modal patterns using self-
attention architecture. The recent emergence of foundation
models with more clinical knowledge holds promise as a
potential future direction.
Recently, with the increase in model size, advances in
the ﬁeld have shifted towards Vision-Language Pretraining
(VLP) and utilizing pre-trained models. CLIP [21] merges
visual and language information into a shared feature space,
setting new state-of-the-art performance on various down-
stream tasks.
Frozen [27] ﬁne-tunes an image encoder,
whose outputs serve as soft prompts for the language model.
Flamingo [1] introduces cross-attention layers into the LLM
to incorporate visual features, pre-training these new layers
on billions of image-text pairs.
3. Method
3.1. Bridge between Image and Text
The key idea is to utilize the powerful logical reasoning
capabilities of the LLMs to make more robust disease di-
agnosis for medical images. Therefore, we need to build a
bridge to translate medical images into texts as inputs for
the LLM. Our strategy is straightforward: 1) Feed exam
images (e.g., X-Ray) into trained CAD models to obtain
outputs; 2) Translate these outputs (typically tensors) into
natural language; 3) Use language models to summarize the
results and make a ﬁnal conclusion; 4) Based on the results
from visual models and pre-trained medical knowledge in
the language models, engage in conversation about symp-
toms, diagnosis, and treatment. In this section, we mainly
discuss the details of our proposed scheme.
An example is illustrated in Figure 3, where the output of
a disease classiﬁer is a 5-value vector indicating the prob-
abilities of ﬁve diseases, i.e., Cardiomegaly, Edema, Con-
solidation, Atelectasis, and Pleural Effusion.
After that,
we need to translate this result into a prompt sentence for
the LLM. A natural way of prompting is to show all ﬁve
kinds of pathology and their corresponding scores. We ﬁrst
tell the LLM “Higher disease score means higher possi-
bility of illness” as the basic rule in order to avoid some
misconception. Then, we represent the score of each dis-
ease as “${disease} score: ${score}” as shown in upper-
right panel (Prompt#1). Reports generated using Prompt#1
can be found at second column in Figure 8 and Figure 9.
One may notice that the LLMs are heavily inﬂuenced by
Prompt#1, usually repeating all the numbers in the output.
Reports generated from Prompt#1 are very different from
radiologist’s reports since the concrete diagnostic scores is
not frequently used in clinical settings.
To align with the language commonly used in clinical re-
ports, we propose to transform the concrete scores into de-
scriptions of disease severity as shown in lower-left panel
(Prompt#2). Prompt#2 will be designed using a grading
system, which will divide the scores into four categories:
”No sign” [0.0-0.2), ”Small possibility” [0.2-0.5), ”Likely”
[0.5-0.9), and ”Deﬁnitely” [0.9 and above).
These cate-
gories will be used to describe the likelihood of each of
the ﬁve observations. Prompt#3 is a concise one that re-
ports diseases with diagnosis scores higher than 0.5 in the
prompt. If no prediction is made among all ﬁve diseases,
the prompt will be “No Finding”. Reports generated from
Prompt#2 and Prompt#3 are generally acceptable and rea-
sonable in most cases as one can observe in Figure 8 and
Figure 9. “Network A” is frequently referenced in the gen-
erated reports. Some prompt tricks, e.g., “Revise the report
based on results from Network A but without mentioning
Network A”, can be applied to removing its mention. We do
not utilize these tricks in current experiments.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Disease
Classifier
output = [0.238,
0.086,
0.923,
0.379,
0.167]
Output tensor
Output tensor
# Cardiomegaly
# Edema
# Consolidation
# Atelectasis
# Pleural Effusion
Prompt #2
Network A: 
No sign of Edema and Pleural Effusion.
Small possibility of Cardiomegaly.
Patient is likely to have Atelectasis.
Definitely have Consolidation.
Prompt #3
Network A’s diagnosis prediction is
Consolidation.
Prompt #1
Higher disease score means higher 
possibility of illness. Network A: 
Cardiomegaly score: 0.238, Edema score: 
0.086, Consolidation score: 0.923, 
Atelectasis score: 0.379, Pleural 
Effusion score: 0.167.
Figure 3. Prompts that bridge between tensor and text. We show three different prompt designs.
Frequency
Report Length (#words)
Frequency
Report Length (#words)
(b) Report Length using Different Prompts
(a) Report Length from Different LLMs
Figure 4. Length comparison of generated reports.
3.2. Dataset and Implementation
In this paper, we evaluate the performance of the com-
bination of a report generation network (R2GenCMN [4])
and a classiﬁcation network (PCAM [32]). The report gen-
eration networks (CvT2DistilGPT2 and R2GenCMN) are
trained on the MIMIC-CXR dataset [11]. The MIMIC-CXR
dataset is a large-scale public dataset of chest x-ray images
with free-text radiology reports. It contains 377,110 images
corresponding to 227,835 radiographic studies performed at
the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, MA.
At the same time, the classiﬁer is trained on the CheXpert
dataset [10]. CheXpert is a large public dataset for chest ra-
diograph interpretation, consisting of 224,316 chest radio-
graphs of 65,240 patients.
The reports from the LLMs are tested on the ofﬁcial test
set of the MIMIC dataset. Due to the current limitation of
ChatGPT usage (i.e., around 20 requests per hour), we are
unable to test the entire test set of MIMIC-CXR now. There-
fore, 300 cases are randomly selected, including 50 cases of
Cardiomegaly, 50 cases of Edema, 50 cases of Consolida-
tion, 50 cases of Atelectasis, 50 cases of Pleural effusion,
and 50 cases with no ﬁndings. During the evaluation pro-
cess, the text reports were converted to multi-class labels
using cheXbert [26].
The LLMs are updating constantly to include more new
knowledge and events, leading to the improvement of their
reasoning capability. The GPT-3 model we use in this paper
is text-davinci-003 which was released by OpenAI on Feb,
2023 based on IntructGPT [18]. The maxlen of the output
is set to 1024 and temperature set to 0.5. The ChatGPT [17]
model used is the Jan-30-2023 version. In the section “In-
teractive and Understandable CAD”, ChatGPT is used to
generate the example. During our test, the GPT-3 can also
provide accurate and helpful chat.
4. Report Generation
4.1. Quality Improvement of the Generated Report
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our pro-
posed method with other two report-generation methods,
i.e., R2GenCMN [4] and CvT2DistilGPT2 [16]. On the
basis of clinical importance and prevalence, we focus on
ﬁve kinds of observations. Three metrics, including preci-
sion (PR), recall (RC), and F1-score (F1), are reported in
Table 1.
The strengths of our method are clearly shown in Ta-
ble 1. It has obvious advantages in RC and F1, and is only
weaker than R2GenCMN in the term of PR. Our method
has a relatively high Recall and F1-score on MIMIC-CXR
dataset. For all ﬁve kinds of diseases, both CvT2DistilGPT2
and R2GenCMN show inferior performance to our method
concerning RC and F1.
Speciﬁcally, their performances
on Edema and Consolidation are rather low.
Their RC
values on Edema are 0.468 and 0.252, respectively, while
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
CvT2DistilGPT2
r2GENCMN
Ours (GPT-3)
Ours (ChatGPT)
Figure 5. F1-score comparison on 5 observations.
our method achieves the RC value of 0.626 based on GPT-
3. The same phenomenon can be observed in Consolida-
tion, where the ﬁrst two methods hold the values of 0.239
and 0.121 while ours (GPT-3) drastically outperforms them,
with the RC value of 0.803. The R2GenCMN has a higher
PR value compared to our method on three of ﬁve diseases.
However, the cost of R2GenCMN’s high performance on
Precision is its weakness in the other two metrics, which
can lead to biased report generation, e.g., seldomly report-
ing any potential diseases. At the same time, our method
has the highest F1 among all methods, and we believe it can
be the most trustworthy report generator.
4.2. How LLMs affect Report Quality
In this section, we compare the performance of differ-
ent LLMs for report generation. We use Prompt#3 as the
default prompt.
OpenAI provides four different sizes of
GPT-3 models through its publicly accessible API: text-ada-
001, text-babbage-001, text-curie-001, and text-davinci-
003. The smallest text-ada-001 can not generate meaningful
reports and is therefore not included in this experiment. The
size of the models has not been ofﬁcially disclosed. The ﬁg-
ures listed in Table 2 are approximate estimates based on the
information in [7].
We report the F1-score of all observations in Table 2. It is
noteworthy that language models struggle to perform well
in clinical tasks when their model size is limited. The di-
agnostic performances of text-babbage-001 and text-curie-
001 is subpar, as demonstrated by their low average F1-
scores over ﬁve observations compared with the last two
models. The improvement in diagnostic performance is ev-
ident in text-davinci-003, whose model size is hundreds
of times larger than that of text-babbage-001.
On aver-
age, text-davinci-003’s F1-score is improved from 0.471 to
0.591. The ChatGPT is slightly better than text-davinci-
003, achieving the improvement of 0.014, and their diag-
nostic abilities are comparable. Overall, the diagnostic ca-
pability of language models is proportional to their size,
highlighting the critical role of the logistic reasoning ca-
pability of LLMs.
In our experiments, it can be observed that more capable
models generally produce longer reports as shown in Fig-
ure 6. At the same time, nearly 40% of reports generated by
text-babbage-001 and nearly 15% of reports generated by
text-curie-001 have no meaningful content.
Report Length (#words)
Frequency
Figure 6. Length of Reports generated by different models. “Bab-
bage”, “Curie” and “Davinci” represent the three GPT-3 models
with different model sizes, i.e., text-babbage-001, text-curie-001,
and text-davinci-003.
5. Interactive and Understandable CAD
The proposed ChatCAD offers several beneﬁts, includ-
ing its ability to utilize LLM’s extensive and reliable med-
ical knowledge to provide interactive explanations and ad-
vice. As shown in Figure 7, two examples of the interactive
CAD are provided, with one chat discussing pleural effu-
sion and the other addressing edema and its relationship to
swelling.
Through this approach, patients can gain a clearer under-
standing of their symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment op-
tions, leading to more efﬁcient and cost-effective consulta-
tions with medical experts. As language models continue
to advance and become more accurate with access to more
trustworthy medical training data, ChatCAD has the poten-
tial to signiﬁcantly enhance the quality of online healthcare
services.
6. Limitations and Discussion
In this paper, we explore a novel framework, ChatCAD,
introducing large language models in CAD. The proposed
method, however, still has limitations to be solved.
First, LLM-generated reports are not human like in a cer-
tain way. LLM is likely to output sentences like “Network
A’s diagnosis prediction is consistent with the ﬁndings in
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Table 1. Diagnostic accuracy comparison with SOTA label generation methods. Our methods use the Prompt#3 setting.
Observations
CvT2DistilGPT2 [16]
R2GenCMN [4]
Ours (GPT-3)
Ours (ChatGPT)
PR
RC
F1
PR
RC
F1
PR
RC
F1
PR
RC
F1
Cardiomegaly
0.512
0.591
0.549
0.590
0.534
0.561
0.606
0.569
0.587
0.663
0.595
0.627
Edema
0.224
0.468
0.303
0.563
0.252
0.348
0.563
0.626
0.593
0.556
0.514
0.534
Consolidation
0.063
0.239
0.099
0.667
0.121
0.205
0.310
0.803
0.447
0.322
0.697
0.440
Atelectasis
0.306
0.388
0.342
0.442
0.504
0.471
0.408
0.991
0.578
0.470
0.981
0.636
Pleural Effusion
0.454
0.692
0.548
0.819
0.500
0.618
0.634
0.916
0.749
0.736
0.845
0.787
Average
0.312
0.476
0.368
0.616
0.382
0.441
0.504
0.781
0.591
0.549
0.726
0.605
Table 2. F1-score comparison of different-size LLMs
Model
Size
Cardiomegaly
Edema
Consolidation
Atelectasis
Pleural Effusion
Average
text-babbage-001
∼1.3B
0.350
0.479
0.418
0.471
0.639
0.471
text-curie-001
∼6.7B
0.529
0.451
0.369
0.515
0.674
0.508
text-davinci-003
∼175B
0.587
0.593
0.447
0.578
0.749
0.591
ChatGPT
∼175B
0.627
0.534
0.440
0.636
0.787
0.605
the radiological report” or “The ﬁndings from Network A’s
diagnosis prediction are supported by the X-ray”. This is
reﬂected on natural language similarity metrics when we
compare to our baseline method. ChatCAD improved the
diagnosis accuracy but dropped the BLEU score [20]. A
promising way to address this issue is to add a module af-
ter ChatGPT to ﬁlter generated reports. Or add prompt like
“please do not mention Network A”.
Additionally, we only design three typical kinds of
prompts that are intuitive, and there is room for improve-
ment. LLMs are capable of solving logical reasoning prob-
lems without additional computational costs [31]. In cur-
rent ChatCAD, we did not give the network about patient’s
major complaint since there is no such dataset available. We
believe the LLMs can process more complex information
than what we currently provide. Better datasets and bench-
marks are needed.
Our experiments demonstrate signiﬁcant impact of lan-
guage model size on diagnostic accuracy. Larger, advanced,
and more truthy LLMs such as the upcoming GPT-4 may
improve the accuracy and report quality further. However,
the role of vision classiﬁers has not yet been explored, and
additional research is necessary to determine if models such
as ViT [6] or SwinTransformer [15], which boast larger pa-
rameters, can deliver improved results. On the other hand,
LLMs can also be used to help the training of vision models,
such as correcting outputs of vision models using related
medical knowledge learned in LLMs.
In our work, we have only carried out a qualitative anal-
ysis of the prompt design instead of a quantitative analy-
sis. Further in-depth investigations will be undertaken once
the API for ChatGPT becomes available for use. Moreover,
the speciﬁcs of this paper have not been discussed with any
clinical professionals, and therefore it still lacks rigor in
many places. We will improve it in subsequent versions.
References
[1] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine
Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch,
Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a vi-
sual language model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.14198, 2022. 3
[2] Emily Alsentzer, John R Murphy, Willie Boag, Wei-Hung
Weng, Di Jin, Tristan Naumann, and Matthew McDermott.
Publicly available clinical bert embeddings. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.03323, 2019. 3
[3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-
biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakan-
tan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Lan-
guage models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 1, 3
[4] Zhihong Chen, Yaling Shen, Yan Song, and Xiang Wan.
Generating radiology reports via memory-driven trans-
former. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 59th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing, Aug. 2021. 3, 4, 6
[5] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova.
Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. 1, 3
[6] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Syl-
vain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-
formers for image recognition at scale.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. 6
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Report: A left-sided dual-lumen central venous catheter tip has been
noted to terminate in the proximal right atrium. Lung volumes are low
with moderate enlargement of the cardiac silhouette. The mediastinal
contour appears similar. Network's diagnosis prediction is consistent
with the findings as it highlights the presence of edema, consolidation,
atelectasis, and pleural effusion. The report confirms the presence of
mild pulmonary edema and small bilateral pleural effusions, which are
new since the last imaging. Additionally, patchy opacities in the lung
bases are likely due to areas of atelectasis. No pneumothorax is present
and no acute osseous abnormalities have been identified.
Is pleural effusion serious?
Pleural effusion, or the buildup of fluid in the pleural cavity, can be a
serious condition if left untreated. The fluid accumulation can put
pressure on the lungs and make it difficult to breathe, causing shortness
of breath, chest pain, and discomfort. In severe cases, pleural effusion
can cause complete collapse of one lung, known as pneumothorax, or
lead to respiratory failure and death.
However, early diagnosis and treatment can often prevent these serious
complications. The severity of pleural effusion depends on several
factors, including the underlying cause, the amount of fluid buildup, and
the overall health of the individual. In many cases, pleural effusion is
treatable and the prognosis is good with prompt and appropriate care.
How much fluid are normal? 
A small amount of fluid is present in the pleural cavity normally, and this
is referred to as "physiologic" or "transudative" pleural fluid. This fluid
serves as a lubricant, allowing the lungs to move smoothly within the
chest cavity during breathing.
An abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pleural cavity, which is referred
to as "pleural effusion," can range from a few milliliters to several liters.
The amount of fluid that is considered normal or abnormal can vary
depending on the individual and the underlying cause of the effusion.
In general, a pleural effusion is considered significant if it is large enough
to cause symptoms or if it is affecting the function of the lung.
Report: Chest pa and lateral views were provided and show a port-a-cath
over the left chest wall with the catheter tip extending into the region of
the low superior vena cava. The lung volumes are decreased, limiting
assessment. There is no evidence of focal consolidation, effusion, or
pneumothorax. The cardiomediastinal silhouette is within normal limits.
The imaged osseous structures are intact. No free air is seen below the
right hemidiaphragm. However, the diagnostic prediction made by
Network suggests the presence of Edema. Further imaging or diagnostic
studies may be necessary to confirm this finding and assess the extent of
the edema.
Difficulty breathing is a common symptom of edema, particularly if the
edema is affecting the lungs. When the lungs become congested with
fluid, it can be difficult to get enough air into the lungs, leading to
shortness of breath. Other symptoms of edema in the lungs can include:
•Chest pain or discomfort
•Rapid breathing or wheezing
•Fatigue or weakness
•Coughing, especially coughing up pink, frothy mucus
•Swelling in the legs, ankles, or feet
•Rapid or irregular heartbeat
If you are experiencing difficulty breathing, it is important to seek
medical attention as soon as possible, as this can be a sign of a serious
underlying condition. Your doctor will be able to diagnose the cause of
your symptoms and recommend appropriate treatment.
I feel difficult breathing, is it a symptom of edema?
Why does edema cause swelling in the legs, ankles, or feet?
Edema can cause swelling in the legs, ankles, or feet because it is a
condition characterized by the accumulation of excess fluid in the body's
tissues. This fluid buildup can occur when the body's circulatory system
is not functioning properly, leading to an increase in pressure in the
blood vessels and the leakage of fluid into the surrounding tissues. This
excess fluid can collect in the lower extremities, causing swelling in the
legs, ankles, or feet.
This is my X-Ray image, write me a report.
This is my X-Ray image, write me a report.
Smoking, high blood pressure, and age are all factors that can increase
the risk of developing certain medical conditions that can cause pleural
effusions. 1. Smoking can damage the lung tissue and increase the risk of
lung infections and lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and pneumonia, both of which can lead to pleural
effusions. 2. High blood pressure, also known as hypertension, can lead
to heart problems such as heart failure, which can cause fluid to
accumulate in the pleural cavity. 3. As people age, their risk of
developing certain medical conditions that can cause pleural effusions
increases. These include heart failure, lung diseases, and cancers.
I'm 50 years old, smoke a lot, and have high blood pressure, is that related?
This is because the heart is responsible for pumping blood throughout
the body, and if it is not functioning properly, it can lead to an increase in
pressure in the blood vessels in the lungs, causing fluid to leak out into
the surrounding tissues. This can lead to edema in the lungs, which can
cause difficulty breathing and other respiratory symptoms.
Why is lung related to fluid circulatory system?
Figure 7. Two examples of interactive CAD using our framework and ChatGPT.
[7] Leo Gao. On the sizes of openai api models. 5
[8] Yu Gu, Robert Tinn, Hao Cheng, Michael Lucas, Naoto
Usuyama, Xiaodong Liu, Tristan Naumann, Jianfeng Gao,
and Hoifung Poon. Domain-speciﬁc language model pre-
training for biomedical natural language processing. ACM
Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH),
3(1):1–23, 2021. 3
[9] Simao Herdade, Armin Kappeler, KoﬁBoakye, and Joao
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Soares. Image captioning: Transforming objects into words.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32,
2019. 3
[10] Jeremy Irvin, Pranav Rajpurkar, Michael Ko, Yifan Yu, Sil-
viana Ciurea-Ilcus, Chris Chute, Henrik Marklund, Behzad
Haghgoo, Robyn Ball, Katie Shpanskaya, et al. Chexpert:
A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and
expert comparison. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence, volume 33, pages 590–597, 2019.
4
[11] Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Seth J Berkowitz,
Nathaniel R Greenbaum, Matthew P Lungren, Chih-ying
Deng, Roger G Mark, and Steven Horng. Mimic-cxr, a de-
identiﬁed publicly available database of chest radiographs
with free-text reports. Scientiﬁc data, 6(1):317, 2019. 4
[12] Tiffany H Kung, Morgan Cheatham, Arielle Medinilla, Chat-
GPT, Czarina Sillos, Lorie De Leon, Camille Elepano, Marie
Madriaga, Rimel Aggabao, Giezel Diaz-Candido, et al. Per-
formance of chatgpt on usmle: Potential for ai-assisted med-
ical education using large language models. medRxiv, pages
2022–12, 2022. 3
[13] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon
Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang. Biobert:
a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for
biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics, 36(4):1234–1240,
2020. 3
[14] Guanxiong Liu, Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Matthew McDermott,
Willie Boag, Wei-Hung Weng, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh
Ghassemi. Clinically accurate chest x-ray report generation.
In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages 249–
269. PMLR, 2019. 3
[15] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng
Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer:
Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 10012–10022, 2021. 6
[16] Aaron Nicolson, Jason Dowling, and Bevan Koopman. Im-
proving chest x-ray report generation by leveraging warm-
starting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09405, 2022. 4, 6
[17] OpenAI. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue,
2023. 1, 4
[18] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L
Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agar-
wal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
Training language
models to follow instructions with human feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022. 4
[19] Xi Ouyang, Jiayu Huo, Liming Xia, Fei Shan, Jun Liu,
Zhanhao Mo, Fuhua Yan, Zhongxiang Ding, Qi Yang, Bin
Song, et al.
Dual-sampling attention network for diagno-
sis of covid-19 from community acquired pneumonia. IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, 39(8):2595–2605, 2020.
2
[20] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing
Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318,
2002. 6
[21] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-
ing transferable visual models from natural language super-
vision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 3
[22] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya
Sutskever, et al. Improving language understanding by gen-
erative pre-training. 2018. 1
[23] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with
a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 21(1):5485–5551, 2020. 3
[24] Dinggang Shen, Guorong Wu, and Heung-Il Suk.
Deep
learning in medical image analysis.
Annual review of
biomedical engineering, 19:221–248, 2017. 2
[25] Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi,
Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tan-
wani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large lan-
guage models encode clinical knowledge.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.13138, 2022. 3
[26] Akshay Smit, Saahil Jain, Pranav Rajpurkar, Anuj Pareek,
Andrew Y Ng, and Matthew P Lungren. Chexbert: com-
bining automatic labelers and expert annotations for accu-
rate radiology report labeling using bert.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.09167, 2020. 4
[27] Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob L Menick, Serkan Cabi, SM Es-
lami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill.
Multimodal few-shot
learning with frozen language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34:200–212, 2021. 3
[28] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017. 3
[29] Jun Wang, Abhir Bhalerao, and Yulan He. Cross-modal pro-
totype driven network for radiology report generation.
In
Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference,
Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part
XXXV, pages 563–579. Springer, 2022. 3
[30] Sheng Wang, Xi Ouyang, Tianming Liu, Qian Wang, and
Dinggang Shen. Follow my eye: Using gaze to supervise
computer-aided diagnosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 2022. 2
[31] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.11903, 2022. 6
[32] Wenwu Ye, Jin Yao, Hui Xue, and Yi Li. Weakly supervised
lesion localization with probabilistic-cam pooling, 2020. 4
[33] Quanzeng You, Hailin Jin, Zhaowen Wang, Chen Fang, and
Jiebo Luo. Image captioning with semantic attention. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 4651–4659, 2016. 3
[34] Yixiao Zhang, Xiaosong Wang, Ziyue Xu, Qihang Yu, Alan
Yuille, and Daguang Xu. When radiology report generation
meets knowledge graph. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 12910–
12917, 2020. 3
[35] Xiangyu Zhao, Zengxin Qi, Sheng Wang, Qian Wang, Xue-
hai Wu, Ying Mao, and Lichi Zhang. Rcps: Rectiﬁed con-
trastive pseudo supervision for semi-supervised medical im-
age segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.05500, 2023.
2
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
A left-sided AICD device is noted with leads
terminating in the right atrium and right
ventricle.
Significant
enlargement
of
the
cardiac silhouette is demonstrated with a
Cardiomegaly score of 0.946. The mediastinal
contour is similar. Mild to moderate Pulmonary
Edema is present with an Edema score of
0.588, and small bilateral Pleural Effusions are
observed with a Pleural Effusion score of 0.849.
There are patchy opacities in the lung bases,
likely reflecting areas of Atelectasis with a score
of 0.708. No pneumothorax is present, and
there are no acute osseous abnormalities.
Prompt1
Prompt2
Prompt3
As compared to the previous radiograph, the
patient has received a right internal jugular
vein catheter. The course of the catheter is
unremarkable and the tip of the catheter
projects over the mid-superior vena cava.
However,
the
current
radiograph
shows
findings of cardiomegaly with a score of 0.189,
edema with a score of 0.713, consolidation
with a score of 0.479, atelectasis with a score
of 0.803, and pleural effusion with a score of
0.702. Despite these findings, there is still no
evidence
of
complications,
notably
no
pneumothorax.
The
radiograph
remains
otherwise unchanged.
Ap portable upright view of the chest shows a
dialysis catheter with its tip extending into the
right atrium. The lung volumes are low, which
limits the assessment of the chest. There is a
right IJ central venous catheter with its tip in
the region of the low SVC. The heart is
moderately enlarged with a Cardiomegaly score
of 0.178. There is significant pulmonary edema
with an Edema score of 0.496 and small
bilateral
pleural
effusions
with
a
Pleural
Effusion score of 0.725. There is evidence of
consolidation with a Consolidation score of
0.509 and Atelectasis with a score of 0.704. No
pneumothorax is present, and the mediastinal
contour is stable. The bony structures are
intact.
Chest X-rays, both ap upright and lateral views,
were performed. The results from a deep
learning network (Network A) indicate the
presence of cardiomegaly with a score of
0.977.
There
is
also
mild
evidence
of
pulmonary
edema
(score:
0.492)
and
a
suggestion of consolidation (score: 0.493) and
atelectasis (score: 0.672). The network also
indicates the presence of pleural effusion
(score: 0.598). Hilar congestion and mediastinal
contour stability were noted on the original
report. No large effusion or pneumothorax was
detected.
The
bony
structures
are
intact.
Although the original report mentioned mild
pulmonary edema, the results from Network A
suggest that it may be more pronounced. No
convincing evidence of pneumonia was found
on either the original report or the results from
Network A.
s59379638
The
patient
is
found
to
have
multiple
conditions affecting their chest and heart. A
left-sided AICD device is present, with leads
terminating in the right atrium and right
ventricle. Moderate to severe enlargement of
the cardiac silhouette (cardiomegaly) is noted
and is confirmed by the results from Network
A. The mediastinal contour is unchanged. The
presence of mild pulmonary edema is new and
is
accompanied
by
small
bilateral
pleural
effusions. Patchy opacities in the lung bases are
noted and are likely reflective of areas of
atelectasis, as also indicated by the results from
Network A. No pneumothorax is present. There
are no acute osseous abnormalities seen on
imaging. The patient is likely to have edema,
consolidation, and atelectasis, along with a
pleural effusion, as indicated by the results
from Network A.
The latest radiograph shows that there is no
sign of Cardiomegaly. However, there is a small
possibility of Consolidation. The patient is likely
to have Edema, Atelectasis, or Pleural Effusion.
The patient has received a right internal jugular
vein catheter, and its course appears to be
unremarkable. The tip of the catheter projects
over the mid-superior vena cava, and there is
no
evidence
of
complications
such
as
pneumothorax. The radiograph is otherwise
unchanged from the previous one.
The ap portable upright view of the chest
showed the presence of a dialysis catheter with
its tip extending into the right atrium and a
right ij central venous catheter with its tip in
the region of the low svc. The heart remains
mildly enlarged with no sign of cardiomegaly,
however, there is a small possibility of edema
present. The lung volumes are low, limiting
assessment, and there is mild pulmonary
edema with small bilateral pleural effusions
noted. No pneumothorax was detected, and
the
mediastinal
contour
is
stable.
Bony
structures were intact.
The
chest
x-rays
show
evidence
of
cardiomegaly
and
hilar
congestion.
Mild
pulmonary edema is also noted, but there is no
large
effusion
or
pneumothorax.
The
mediastinal contour appears stable, and the
bony structures are intact. The findings are
consistent with those from Network A, which
suggests a small possibility of edema and
consolidation, with a likelihood of atelectasis
and pleural effusion. There is no convincing
evidence of pneumonia.
There is moderate to severe enlargement of
the
cardiac
silhouette,
consistent
with
a
diagnosis of cardiomegaly. The contour of the
mediastinum is similar. There is evidence of
new
mild
pulmonary
edema,
with
small
bilateral pleural effusions and patchy opacities
in the lung bases that are likely due to
atelectasis. A left-sided AICD device is present
with leads terminating in the right atrium and
right ventricle. No pneumothorax is identified
and there are no acute osseous abnormalities.
As compared to the previous radiograph, the
patient has received a right internal jugular
vein catheter and the course of the catheter is
unremarkable with the tip of the catheter
projecting over the mid SVC. There is no
evidence
of
complications,
notably
no
pneumothorax.
However,
the
diagnosis
prediction
from
Network
A
suggests
the
presence of Edema, Atelectasis, and Pleural
Effusion, which indicate the patient may have
fluid accumulation in the lung and surrounding
tissues.
Further
evaluation
and
medical
intervention may be necessary to address
these
conditions.
The
overall
radiograph
remains otherwise unchanged.
The ap portable upright view of the chest
shows a dialysis catheter with its tip extending
into the right atrium. There is also a right
internal jugular central venous catheter with its
tip in the region of the low superior vena cava.
The heart is mildly enlarged and there is
evidence of mild pulmonary edema with small
bilateral pleural effusions, consistent with the
diagnosis of pleural effusion. No pneumothorax
is seen, and the mediastinal contour is stable.
The bony structures are intact. However, lung
volumes are low, limiting the assessment of the
chest. Based on the results from Network A,
the findings are consistent with a diagnosis of
consolidation and atelectasis in addition to
pleural effusion.
The ap upright and lateral views of the chest
were reviewed and the results from Network A
were taken into consideration. The diagnosis of
cardiomegaly is confirmed, with evidence of
hilar congestion and mild pulmonary edema.
The presence of pleural effusion is also noted.
Although no large effusion or pneumothorax
was initially identified, the effusion seen on the
chest images is consistent with the diagnosis of
pleural effusion as identified by Network A. The
mediastinal contour remains stable, and the
bony structures are intact. No convincing
evidence for pneumonia was identified on the
initial review.
ChatGPT’s Prompt Test
s55498995
Image
s59707249
s53350789
Figure 8. ChatGPT’s generated reports from three different prompt designs.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Prompt1
Prompt2
Prompt3
left-sided aicd device is noted with leads
terminating in the right atrium and right
ventricle . moderate to severe enlargement of
the cardiac silhouette is re- demonstrated . the
mediastinal contour is similar . there is mild
pulmonary edema new in the interval with
small
bilateral
pleural
effusions
.
patchy
opacities in the lung bases likely reflect areas of
atelectasis . no pneumothorax is present . there
are no acute osseous abnormalities .
as compared to the previous radiograph the
patient has received a right internal jugular
vein catheter . the course of the catheter is
unremarkable the tip of the catheter projects
over the mid svc . there is no evidence of
complications notably no pneumothorax .
otherwise unchanged radiograph
ap portable upright view of the chest . dialysis
catheter is again seen with its tip extending
into the right atrium . lung volumes are low
limiting assessment . there is a right ij central
venous catheter with its tip in the region of the
low svc . the heart remains mildly enlarged .
there is mild pulmonary edema with small
bilateral pleural effusions . no pneumothorax .
mediastinal contour is stable . bony structures
are intact .
ap upright and lateral views of the chest
provided . cardiomegaly is again noted with
hilar congestion and mild pulmonary edema .
no
large
effusion
or
pneumothorax
.
no
convincing
evidence
for
pneumonia
.
mediastinal contour is stable . bony structures
are intact
s59379638
Left-sided AICD device is noted with leads
terminating in the right atrium and right
ventricle. Moderate to severe cardiomegaly is
re-demonstrated. The mediastinal contour is
similar. There is mild pulmonary edema with
small bilateral pleural effusions and patchy
opacities in the lung bases likely reflecting
areas of atelectasis and consolidation. No
pneumothorax is present. There are no acute
osseous abnormalities.
As compared to the previous radiograph, the
patient has received a right internal jugular
vein catheter. The course of the catheter is
unremarkable and the tip of the catheter
projects over the mid SVC. There is no evidence
of complications, notably no pneumothorax.
However, there is an increased cardiomegaly
score
of
0.189,
edema
score
of
0.713,
consolidation score of 0.479, atelectasis score
of 0.803, and
A portable upright view of the chest is seen. A
dialysis catheter is again seen with its tip
extending into the right atrium. The heart is
mildly
enlarged
with
cardiomegaly
(score
0.178). There is evidence of pulmonary edema
(score
0.496)
and
mild
bilateral
pleural
effusions (score 0.725). There is also evidence
of consolidation (score 0.509) and atelectasis
(score 0.704). No pneumothorax is seen
Ap upright and lateral views of the chest
provided. Cardiomegaly is again noted with
mild
pulmonary
edema
and
mild
pleural
effusion. Hilar congestion is present. No large
effusion
or
pneumothorax.
No
convincing
evidence
for
consolidation
or
atelectasis.
Mediastinal contour is stable. Bony structures
are intact.
Left-sided AICD device is noted with leads
terminating in the right atrium and right
ventricle. Moderate to severe enlargement of
the cardiac silhouette is re-demonstrated. The
mediastinal contour is similar. There is mild
pulmonary edema new in the interval with
small bilateral pleural effusions and evidence of
edema,
consolidation,
and
atelectasis.
No
pneumothorax is present. There are no acute
osseous abnormalities.
No sign of Cardiomegaly or Consolidation.
Patient is likely to have Edema, Atelectasis,
Pleural Effusion. There is no evidence of
complications
notably
no
pneumothorax.
Otherwise unchanged radiograph. The right
internal jugular vein catheter is in place with an
unremarkable
course
and
the
tip
of
the
catheter projects over the mid SVC.
Ap portable upright view of the chest. Dialysis
catheter is again seen with its tip extending
into the right atrium. Lung volumes are low
limiting assessment. There is a right IJ central
venous catheter with its tip in the region of the
low SVC. The heart remains mildly enlarged.
There is no sign of Cardiomegaly. There is small
possibility of Edema. Patient is likely to have
Consolidation, Atelectasis, and Pleural Effusion.
No
Ap upright and lateral views of the chest
provided. Cardiomegaly is again noted with
hilar congestion and mild pulmonary edema.
No
large
effusion
or
pneumothorax.
No
convincing evidence for pneumonia. Atelectasis
and pleural effusion are present. Mediastinal
contour is stable. Bony structures are intact.
GPT-3’s Prompt Test
s55498995
Image
s59707249
s53350789
Figure 9. GPT-3’s generated reports from three different prompt designs.
11
