
===== PAGE 1 =====
CTEST-METRIC: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK TO ASSESS CLINICAL VALIDITY OF
METRICS FOR CT REPORT GENERATION
Vanshali Sharma, Andrea Mia Bejar, Gorkem Durak, and Ulas Bagci
Machine and Hybrid Intelligence Lab, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
In the generative AI era, where even critical medical
tasks are increasingly automated, radiology report generation
(RRG) continues to rely on suboptimal metrics for quality as-
sessment. Developing domain-specific metrics has therefore
been an active area of research, yet it remains challenging due
to the lack of a unified, well-defined framework to assess their
robustness and applicability in clinical contexts. To address
this, we present CTest-Metric, a first unified metric assess-
ment framework with three modules determining the clinical
feasibility of metrics for CT RRG. The modules test: (i) Writ-
ing Style Generalizability (WSG) via LLM-based rephrasing;
(ii) Synthetic Error Injection (SEI) at graded severities; and
(iii) Metrics-vs-Expert correlation (MvE) using clinician rat-
ings on 175 “disagreement” cases. Eight widely used metrics
(BLEU, ROUGE, METEOR, BERTScore-F1, F1-RadGraph,
RaTEScore, GREEN Score, CRG) are studied across seven
LLMs built on a CT-CLIP encoder. Using our novel frame-
work, we found that lexical NLG metrics are highly sensitive
to stylistic variations; GREEN Score aligns best with expert
judgments (Spearman 0.70), while CRG shows negative cor-
relation; and BERTScore-F1 is least sensitive to factual error
injection. We will release the framework, code, and allowable
portion of the anonymized evaluation data (rephrased/error-
injected CT reports), to facilitate reproducible benchmarking
and future metric development.
1. INTRODUCTION
With recent breakthroughs in Large Language Models (LLMs)
for automated radiology report generation (RRG) [1, 2], a
crucial question arises: Do existing metrics capture what ac-
tually matters to trace the clinical efficacy and acceptability
of LLM-generated reports?
A clinically grounded metric
must be insensitive to report writing styles and sensitive to
subtle yet critical factual mismatches. It should also identify
synonymous medical terminologies, and be robust enough
to capture overfitting in AI-based generative models before
deploying them for clinical use.
Despite the availability of a large number of metrics, most
are developed for general-domain text [3, 4, 5], and even a
few domain-specific metrics overlook deeper clinical rele-
This research is partially supported by the NIH grant R01-HL171376.
vance or ignore synonymous terminologies. Therefore, the
existing RRG methods [2, 6] continue to rely on metrics that
are not reflective of clinical fidelity. Consequently, the de-
signing of radiology-specific metrics has been an active area
of research with the aim of evaluating both clinical aspects
and linguistic similarity between generated radiology reports
and the ground truth. However, due to the absence of any
standardized tool and well-defined criteria to test these met-
rics, RRG tasks still rely on inconsistent metrics, resulting in
misleading model selections. This underscores the need for a
system that can serve as a well-defined framework for metrics
developers to assess the clinical applicability of the metrics.
Few prior studies [7, 8] have addressed this problem; how-
ever, their focus has predominantly been on the X-ray RRG.
Since X-ray images are 2D scans, the corresponding reports
are limited to a specific anatomical context and span shorter
sentences. In contrast, 3D CT scans capture volumetric multi-
slice information, resulting in semantically denser narratives
and a broader vocabulary that includes richer anatomical de-
tail, diverse medical terminology, lesion descriptions, and
measurements. Most existing clinical-efficacy (CE) metrics
were originally tailored to X-ray-based vocabulary and thus
struggle to capture complex and diverse terminologies present
in CT reports. Despite this limitation, CT-based studies still
use these metrics for reporting results and model comparison.
Therefore, CT RRG requires special attention in terms of
both designing appropriate metrics and developing a tool to
assess their applicability and feasibility.
In this paper, we develop CTest-Metric, a framework for
evaluating the extent to which a given metric satisfies the cri-
teria for being clinically grounded. This assessment is con-
ducted on eight benchmarking metrics that have been exten-
sively used in recent CT report generation studies, ensuring
consistency with established evaluation practices. The pro-
posed framework includes three analytical modules: a) Writ-
ing Style Generalizability Test (WSG) examines the metrics’
generalizability across different writing styles, b) Synthetic
Error Injection Test (SEI) introduces factual errors in the re-
ports at three different levels and investigates their impact on
the metrics’ outcomes, and c) Metrics-vs-Expert Correlation
Test (MvE) obtains expert ratings for reports exhibiting dis-
agreement among the metrics. Further, a correlation is es-
tablished between the eight metrics and expert ratings for a
arXiv:2601.11488v1  [cs.CL]  16 Jan 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
Fig. 1: (a) The propsoed framework, CTest-Metric, comprises three modules: (i) Writing Style Generalizability Test (WSG);
(ii) Synthetic Error Injection Test (SEI); and (iii) Metrics-vs-Expert Correlation Test (MvE). (b) Sample reports are given.
comprehensive study. By leveraging reports generated using
seven different LLMs in conjunction with expert assessment,
the proposed framework presents a robust pathway that met-
rics developers can utilize when designing new metrics. The
paper’s contributions are summarized below:
• First framework to assess metrics for CT RRG: We de-
veloped CTest-Metric, a novel unified framework to as-
sess metrics for CT RRG. It investigates eight benchmark-
ing metrics on CT reports generated by seven different
LLMs and analyzes the behavior of both NLG (text-based)
and CE metrics for CT report evaluation.
• Expert assessment: Our study selected 175 cases across
predictions from seven LLMs where the metrics showed
conflicting assessments. These specific reports were then
reviewed by clinical experts, and correlations were de-
rived between expert ratings and the metrics’ scores.
• Analyzed the impact of stylistic variations and graded
synthetic errors: We introduced stylistic variations and
factual errors at three severity levels in the CT reports. We
quantified the effect of these changes on metric sensitivity.
2. RELATED WORK
The RRG literature reveals that various NLG and CE met-
rics are commonly used to assess predicted CT reports. The
earlier studies primarily relied on NLG metrics, including
BLEU [3], ROUGE [4], METEOR [5], and BERTScore-
F1 [9]. These metrics quantify textual similarity, for exam-
ple, BLEU measures n-gram overlap, ROUGE emphasizes
sequence-level recall, and METEOR incorporates synonym
matches between the generated and the ground truth report.
Similarly, BERTScore-F1 computes similarity using contex-
tual embeddings. To validate the clinical context, CE metrics
including F1-RadGraph [10] and CheXpert [11] were intro-
duced. While the former extracts entities and relations from
the given reports and measures graph-level scores, the latter
adopts a rule-based labeler for 14 chest X-ray findings. More
recently, RaTEScore [12], GREEN Score [13], and CRG [14]
were introduced. The RaTEScore compares reports on the
entity embedding level and the GREEN score uses regu-
lar expressions to parse error counts from their pre-trained
model output. Unlike other score, the CRG balances penal-
ities based on label distribution in the reports and ignores
clinically irrelevant true negatives.
For the X-ray RRG tasks, prior works [15, 16] followed
a similar trend, relying on the same set of standard metrics
including the four BLEU n-gram levels, METEOR, ROUGE,
and CheXpert. A largely identical evaluation strategy is also
observed in CT RRG, where most studies [1, 2] adopt a sim-
ilar set of NLG and CE metrics, despite the latter being X-
ray-oriented and thus, do not fully capture the semantic and
anatomical complexity of CT reporting. Although the liter-
ature lacks any unified framework for evaluating CT RRG
metrics, some X-ray-focused works such as Yu et al.[8] and
Banerjee et al. [7] highlighted that even advanced metrics can
be inconsistent and poorly correlated with expert ratings.
3. METHODOLOGY
Overview.
Given a 3D CT scan i ∈I with correspond-
ing ground truth report r ∈R, we employed seven report
generation models to generate CT report pj
i ∈P, where
j = 1, 2, .., 7. The seven deep learning models adopt a CT-
CLIP [17] image encoder to extract image features combined

===== PAGE 3 =====
with seven different LLMs, including variants of GPT (Dis-
tilgpt, GPT2, GPT2-Medium, LLaMA-3.2-1B) and LLaMA
(LLaMA-3.2-1B, LLaMA-2-7b-chat-hf), with a biomedical-
domain LLM (BioGPT-Large).
These variants are paired
with two configurations: LLM fine-tuning1 and a frozen-
LLM setup (R2GenGPT’s shallow alignment [15]).
The predictions obtained from each model are assessed
using a set of eight metrics M, where M= {BLEU, ROUGE,
METEOR, BERTScore-F1, F1-RadGraph, RaTEScore, GREEN
Score, CRG}. The first four metrics are NLG-based whereas
the last four are designed for clinical-efficacy check.
The
proposed CTest-Metric framework is illustrated in Fig. 1,
comprising three analytical modules, as detailed below.
3.1. Writing Style Generalizability Test (WSG)
In the WSG module, metrics are tested for sensitivity to re-
port writing style. It evaluates whether they exhibit signifi-
cant performance shifts in response to variations in stylistic
modifications despite unchanged clinical semantics. This test
employs an LLM-based approach using zero-shot instruction-
based prompting on LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct. This approach
rephrases the predicted reports P generated by the seven mod-
els into P ′, while preserving clinical outcomes and semantics.
Each metric is applied on P and P ′, and the final difference
is analyzed. A lower difference indicates metrics’ robustness
towards stylistic variations.
3.2. Synthetic Error Injection Test (SEI)
The SEI module monitors how the metrics penalizes factual
errors of varying severity. We study three levels of errors in-
tentionally injected using the same prompting technique used
in Sec 3.1. It involved introducing one, two and multiple syn-
thetic errors in ground truth reports, followed by evaluation
at each level using the eight metrics from M. Specifically, it
examines the deviation of scores (∆(Sj, SG) = Sj −SG) be-
tween the ideal case SG (where the ground truth is evaluated
against itself) and report scores Sj with intentionally injected
errors at level j. A substantial difference in metrics’ scores for
varying levels of discrepancy shows its strong discriminative
ability to capture factual inconsistencies.
3.3. Metrics-vs-Expert Correlation Test (MvE)
In this module, we systematically quantified the correlation
between metrics in M and expert ratings E. We also exam-
ined inter-metric correlations to understand how they agree or
disagree in report quality evaluation. We computed this cor-
relation on 175 patient reports for which automated metrics
provided conflicting assessments. To this end, we initially
derived per-patient scores for all eight metrics correspond-
ing to each LLM. After normalizing the per-patient scores,
1https://github.com/fkodom/clip-text-decoder
we calculated the standard deviation across all metrics to as-
sess disagreement. The top 25 cases with the highest stan-
dard deviation (i.e, highest variable) were selected. These 175
cases were finally reviewed by clinical experts, yielding ex-
pert ratings E. We then quantified the alignment by comput-
ing Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ) between every
pair of metrics (for inter-metric correlation) and between each
metric in M and the expert ratings E. A higher ρ signifies that
the two metrics tend to rank patients in a similar order while
a lower ρ shows disagreement in their assessment.
4. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
4.1. Dataset and Training Details
We used a publicly available 3D medical imaging dataset, CT-
RATE [17]. It comprises 50,188 non-contrast chest CT vol-
umes, along with their corresponding radiology reports. We
used their official training and validation split. All RRG mod-
els were trained for 10 epochs on NVIDIA A100 GPU using
the hyperparameters specified in the publicly released code.
4.2. Analyzing Writing Style Generalizability Test (WSG)
The WSG results are presented in Fig. 2a, where each
heatmap cell value represents the percentage difference (∆%)
between the original score (S) and the score obtained after
rephrasing (S
′) for the corresponding model-metric pair.
It can be observed that NLG-based metrics were the most
impacted by the stylistic variations (ranging from -48.82%
to -1.16%) because they primarily measure lexical overlap
rather than underlying clinical semantics. Among CE met-
rics, F1-RadGraph experienced the most significant deviation
(ranging from -42.29% to 68.95%) indicating its high sensi-
tivity to rephrasing. The best two performing metrics include
the CRG and the GREEN Score. Since all CE metrics ex-
cept CRG were introduced focusing on X-Ray datasets, their
scores are likely to shift substantially on a vast terminology
set of CT reports, especially when rephrased. Although built
on X-Ray corpora, the GREEN score was originally tested
on out-of-domain modalities, including CT scans, making
it relatively robust. Consequently, it performs comparably
to CRG, which was developed for CT reports. CRG con-
siders the presence/absence of multi-label clinical entities
instead of sentence-level structure, making it less susceptible
to performance shift under rephrasing.
4.3. Analyzing Synthetic Error Injection Test (SEI)
The SEI results in Fig. 3 signify that the metric least impacted
by synthetic errors is the BERTScore-F1 with ∆(SM, SG) of
-0.02 (approximately -2%), whereas the most affected metrics
include the GREEN Score (∆(S1, SG) = -0.0812, ∆(S2, SG)
= -0.1277, ∆(SM, SG) = -0.6053) and the F1-RadGraph
(∆(S1, SG) = -0.0891 , ∆(S2, SG) = -0.1647, ∆(SM, SG) =

===== PAGE 4 =====
(a) Rephrasing robustness (WSG).
(b) Inter-metric and expert correlation.
Fig. 2: Evaluation of metric reliability and robustness across rephrasing, factual error severity, and metric-expert correlations.
-0.3970). It can be observed that all metrics exhibit similar
behavior when the report has minimal difference from the
ideal case but the performance significantly diverges when
multiple errors are injected. Therefore, it is crucial to ex-
amine various error levels to identify metrics’ sensitivity to
critical factual errors.
Fig. 3: Metric response across increasing error levels.
4.4. Analyzing Metrics-vs-Expert Correlation Test (MvE)
As discussed in Sec. 3.3, we considered 175 conflicting cases
for this test. As shown in Fig. 2b, the GREEN Score closely
resembles the Expert Rating E with ρ = 0.7 followed by F1-
RadGraph with ρ = 0.53. The NLG-based metrics demon-
strated a similar correlation trend with E, reporting ρ in a
narrow range of 0.26 to 0.35. The worst performance was ob-
served using the CRG, which presented a negative correlation
with E and other metrics. A high correlation range among
NLP-based metrics indicates strong agreement in their assess-
ment. While F1-RadGraph exhibits consistent alignment to
other metrics, it shows a slight bias to NLG-based metric out-
comes rather than the GREEN Score and Expert Rating.
5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
This study introduces CTest-Metric, a modular framework to
evaluate automated metrics used in CT RRG, assessing their
ability to capture clinical context in reports. By consider-
ing style robustness (WSG), factual-error sensitivity (SEI),
and alignment with expert judgment (MvE), the work demon-
strates that widely used NLG metrics are brittle to rephras-
ing and incompletely capture factual correctness, whereas CE
metrics vary substantially in their agreement with experts.
In particular, GREEN Score exhibits the highest association
with expert ratings on a curated set of “disagreement” cases,
while CRG remains robust to stylistic changes but correlates
negatively with expert scores. This can be attributed to its
reliance on label-level information which makes it largely in-
sensitive to rephrasing, yet it remains less aligned with expert
evaluations. These findings have immediate implications for
metric choice in CT RRG and for how future metrics should
be stress-tested before deployment.
Expert validation involved two reviewers, with a second
opinion sought for ambiguous cases, which limits the diver-
sity of assessment. WSG and SEI depend on an LLM-based
prompting, which primarily introduced laterality and nega-
tion errors, though the fidelity of these edits was not indepen-
dently validated. Finally, all experiments are conducted on
CT-RATE (one of the largest in the literature); broader gener-
alization to other institutions, contrast phases, or body regions
remains to be established. These constraints highlight oppor-
tunities for expanded validation and reporting in subsequent
versions.

===== PAGE 5 =====
6. COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
This research study was conducted retrospectively using hu-
man subject data made available in open access by (CT-Rate).
Ethical approval was not required as confirmed by the license
attached to the open-access data.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Yu Xin, Gorkem Can Ates, Kuang Gong, and Wei
Shao,
“Med3dvlm:
An efficient vision-language
model for 3d medical image analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.20047, 2025.
[2] Theo Di Piazza, Carole Lazarus, Olivier Nempont, and
Loic Boussel, “Ct-agrg: Automated abnormality-guided
report generation from 3d chest ct volumes,” in 2025
IEEE 22nd International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging (ISBI). IEEE, 2025, pp. 01–05.
[3] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu, “Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 40th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2002, pp. 311–318.
[4] Chin-Yew Lin, “Rouge: A package for automatic eval-
uation of summaries,” in Text summarization branches
out, 2004, pp. 74–81.
[5] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie, “Meteor: An au-
tomatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correla-
tion with human judgments,” in Proceedings of the acl
workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures
for machine translation and/or summarization, 2005,
pp. 65–72.
[6] Yiming Shi, Xun Zhu, Kaiwen Wang, Ying Hu, Chenyi
Guo, Miao Li, and Ji Wu, “Med-2e3: A 2d-enhanced
3d medical multimodal large language model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.12783, 2024.
[7] Oishi Banerjee, Agustina Saenz, Kay Wu, Warren
Clements, Adil Zia, Dominic Buensalido, Helen Kav-
noudias, Alain S Abi-Ghanem, Nour El Ghawi, Cibele
Luna, et al., “Rexamine-global: A framework for un-
covering inconsistencies in radiology report generation
metrics,” in Biocomputing 2025: Proceedings of the Pa-
cific Symposium. World Scientific, 2024, pp. 185–198.
[8] Feiyang Yu, Mark Endo, Rayan Krishnan, Ian Pan,
Andy Tsai, Eduardo Pontes Reis, Eduardo Kaiser Uru-
rahy Nunes Fonseca, Henrique Min Ho Lee, Zahra
Shakeri Hossein Abad, Andrew Y Ng, et al., “Evalu-
ating progress in automatic chest x-ray radiology report
generation,” Patterns, vol. 4, no. 9, 2023.
[9] Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi, “Bertscore: Evaluating text
generation with bert,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675,
2019.
[10] Saahil
Jain,
Ashwin
Agrawal,
Adriel
Saporta,
Steven QH Truong, Du Nguyen Duong, Tan Bui,
Pierre Chambon, Yuhao Zhang, Matthew P Lungren,
Andrew Y Ng, et al., “Radgraph: Extracting clinical
entities and relations from radiology reports,”
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.14463, 2021.
[11] Jeremy Irvin, Pranav Rajpurkar, Michael Ko, Yifan Yu,
Silviana Ciurea-Ilcus, Chris Chute, Henrik Marklund,
Behzad Haghgoo, Robyn Ball, Katie Shpanskaya, et al.,
“Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncer-
tainty labels and expert comparison,”
in Proceedings
of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2019,
vol. 33, pp. 590–597.
[12] Weike Zhao, Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang,
Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie, “Ratescore: A metric
for radiology report generation. medrxiv,” 2024.
[13] Sophie Ostmeier, Justin Xu, Zhihong Chen, Maya
Varma, Louis Blankemeier, Christian Bluethgen, Arne
Edward Michalson Md, Michael Moseley, Curtis Lan-
glotz, Akshay S Chaudhari, et al.,
“Green: Genera-
tive radiology report evaluation and error notation,” in
Findings of the association for computational linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2024, 2024, pp. 374–390.
[14] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Suprosanna Shit,
Hadrien Reynaud, Bernhard Kainz, and Bjoern Menze,
“Crg score: A distribution-aware clinical metric for radi-
ology report generation,” in Medical Imaging with Deep
Learning-Short Papers, 2025.
[15] Zhanyu Wang, Lingqiao Liu, Lei Wang, and Luping
Zhou,
“R2gengpt: Radiology report generation with
frozen llms,” Meta-Radiology, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 100033,
2023.
[16] Zhixuan Chen, Luyang Luo, Yequan Bie, and Hao Chen,
“Dia-llama: Towards large language model-driven ct re-
port generation,” in International Conference on Medi-
cal Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interven-
tion. Springer, 2025, pp. 141–151.
[17] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Furkan Almas,
Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Irem Do-
gan, Muhammed Furkan Dasdelen, Bastian Wittmann,
Enis Simsar, Mehmet Simsar, et al.,
“A foundation
model utilizing chest ct volumes and radiology reports
for supervised-level zero-shot detection of abnormali-
ties,” CoRR, 2024.
