
===== PAGE 1 =====
Spatial gene expression at single-cell resolution from histology
using deep learning with GHIST
Xiaohang Fu1,2,3,4,5^, Yue Cao1,3,4,5^, Beilei Bian1,3,4, Chuhan Wang2,3,5, Dinny Graham6,7,8, Nirmala
Pathmanathan7,8,9, Ellis Patrick1,3,4,5,6, Jinman Kim2,3,5, Jean YH Yang1,3,4,5*
1 School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
2 School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
3 Sydney Precision Data Science Centre, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
4 Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
5 Laboratory of Data Discovery for Health Limited (D24H), Science Park, Hong Kong SAR, China.
6 Centre for Cancer Research, The Westmead Institute for Medical Research, NSW 2145, Australia
7 Westmead Breast Cancer Institute, Westmead Hospital, Western Sydney Local Health District,
NSW 2145, Australia
8 Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
9 Douglass Hanly Moir Pathology, Macquarie Park, NSW 2113, Australia
^ These authors contributed equally.
* Correspondence to jean.yang@sydney.edu.au
Abstract
The increased use of spatially resolved transcriptomics provides new biological insights into
disease mechanisms. However, the high cost and complexity of these methods are barriers to
broad clinical adoption. Consequently, methods have been created to predict spot-based gene
expression from routinely-collected histology images. Recent benchmarking showed that current
methodologies have limited accuracy and spatial resolution, constraining translational capacity.
Here, we introduce GHIST, a deep learning-based framework that predicts spatial gene expression
at single-cell resolution by leveraging subcellular spatial transcriptomics and synergistic
relationships between multiple layers of biological information. We validated GHIST using public
datasets and The Cancer Genome Atlas data, demonstrating its flexibility across different spatial
resolutions and superior performance. Our results underscore the utility of in silico generation of
single-cell spatial gene expression measurements and the capacity to enrich existing datasets with
a spatially resolved omics modality, paving the way for scalable multi-omics analysis and new
biomarker discoveries.
Introduction
Spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) profiling technologies provide spatially resolved mapping
of gene expression, and hold the potential to revolutionise our understanding of multicellular
biological systems. SRT can enable new insights to improve the prediction of key clinical outcomes
of complex diseases, including cancers1–4. The recent subcellular in situ imaging-based SRT,
herein referred to as subcellular spatial transcriptomics (SST), platforms (e.g., 10x Xenium5;
NanoString CosMx6; Vizgen MERSCOPE) can map spatial gene expression at subcellular
resolution. Spot-based SRT platforms (e.g. 10x Visium) typically capture the gene expressions of
multiple cells per spot, generating spot-based spatial gene expression (SGE). In contrast, the
newer SST data are assayed at a resolution smaller than the typical cell and are typically passed
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 2 =====
through a cell segmentation workflow to provide “single-cell SGE”. This finer spatial resolution of
gene expression unlocks the capacity to explore a variety of hypotheses that were previously
inaccessible and provide deeper biological insights.
Despite the breakthrough capability in SRT, the high cost associated with these technologies
hinders their broad clinical adoption. On the other hand, histopathology images, such as
haematoxylin-and-eosin (H&E) stained images, are routinely collected and widely available.
H&E-stained images contain rich visual details on cellular and tissue structure that reflect the
integration of the underlying biological information in the tissue7. The capacity to predict SGE from
histopathology alone would unlock insights into variation in gene expression and cell type specific
expression that were previously unattainable from the large library of H&E images available. This
will open up a new pathway to the discovery of novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets for
complex diseases.
Deep learning (DL)-based methods have been developed to facilitate the prediction of spot-level
spatial profiles of gene expression values from H&E-stained images8–14. They include ST-Net,
Hist2ST, HisToGene, DeepPT, and BLEEP. These methods learn visual and spatial associations
between matched H&E images and spot-level SGE data. Existing methods typically examine H&E
image patches with a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)8,10,12 or Transformer9,11 backbone. For
example, ST-Net leveraged a CNN-based backbone to extract an embedding of image patches
that corresponded to spots, then applied a fully connected layer to predict gene expressions of
each spot. Some methods further examined the relationships between adjacent spots on a more
global level, for example with Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). For example, Hist2ST combined a
Convmixer, Transformer, and a GNN to extract patch-based features, and considered the spatial
relationships among the spots to enhance spatial dependencies from the entire image.
Furthermore, an alternative strategy is to apply super-resolution to spot-based data14.
Super-resolved pixels, however, potentially contain a mixture of cells with background areas, and
are thus not at true single-cell resolution. Our previous benchmarking study15 on the existing
methods revealed a weak translational potential, which is likely due to the limited information in the
predictions. In these results, expressions in each spot describe a mixture of cells and a mixture of
cell types, which contain limited power as the spot-based SGE expressions are not at single-cell
resolution. None of these methods have formulated the spatial associations to leverage subcellular
resolution SGE data from newer platforms such as 10x Xenium. Methods have been developed to
leverage histology and SGE data to predict high-resolution SGE, however, they require input
spot-based SGE data during prediction, thereby limiting wider applicability.16–18
The increase in resolution from spot-level to single-cell level poses a substantial challenge, as this
presents an increased number of expression profiles (from hundreds to thousands of spots, to over
tens of thousands of cells), and also necessitates the ability to discern finer-grained variations in
H&E images that correspond to subtle variations in gene expression. These fine-grained details in
H&E images are typically noisy and may provide limited information for discerning patterns that are
even broader than gene expression, such as cell types. Different cell types that express distinct
gene markers and typically exhibit similar morphological features in histology may be difficult to tell
apart with morphological information alone, e.g., some types of lymphocytes including B and T
cells. Additionally, gene expression within a target cell is known to be influenced by neighbouring
cell types, for example, various fibroblast subtypes that occur in the presence of macrophages or
malignant cells. Overall, there are complex relationships between the histological appearance of
cells, gene expression within cells, cell type, and composition of neighbouring cell types. A DL
model can be designed to leverage these relationships to achieve better gene expression
predictions. To our knowledge, there is not yet a method that is specifically designed for single-cell
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 3 =====
SGE prediction from histology images, and the relationships between these multiple layers of
biological information into such a method remains to be leveraged.
Here, we introduce a novel framework to predict spatially resolved single-cell Gene expression
from HISTology, GHIST (pronounced dʒɪst; Figure 1). GHIST addresses the challenges of
predicting single-cell SGE from histology images through a number of key innovations. Most
importantly, GHIST leverages multiple prediction components that use the relationships between
multiple layers of information (including cell type, neighbourhood composition, nuclei morphology,
single-cell expressions). GHIST synergistically captures interdependencies between information
types by its multitask architecture and multiple loss functions, which overall improves SGE
prediction. Furthermore, GHIST is designed to handle different resolutions in addition to
single-cell-level SGE, such as spot-based SGE, for which we demonstrate the superior
performance of GHIST compared to the state-of-the-art approaches. Along with the development
of our method, we demonstrate the power of GHIST in providing an innovative in silico strategy to
add a layer of rich spatial information to existing large-scale databases, without costly practical
experiments. This can facilitate the generation of new hypotheses for spatial experiments, the
discovery of cell-type-specific and spatial associations between biomarkers, and relationships that
provide new insights into disease mechanisms.
Results
GHIST: Leveraging multi-level biological information enables spatially resolved single-cell
gene expression (SGE) prediction
GHIST is a multitask DL-based learning method that enables spatially resolved SGE prediction at
single-cell-level resolution by mapping H&E images to the expression of hundreds of genes within
individual cells in the image, and providing spatial localisation of cells (Figure 1). In other words,
GHIST maps H&E images to a collection of SGE images (where the number of channels equals
the number of genes, and pixel intensities equal the total expression of individual genes within
cells). GHIST can achieve this mapping by learning from samples comprising an H&E image and
its corresponding SST data. Once trained, SST data are not used during inference of SGE. In other
words, the trained model is applied to unseen H&E data only and no additional spatial omics level
information is required. During training, single-cell RNA-seq data are leveraged to improve the
predicted expression profiles by providing known cell type information, and may be extracted from
public repositories such as the Human Cell Atlas or CZI CELLXGENE. There is no requirement for
the single-cell data to be matched to the input H&E images.
GHIST considers the interdependencies between four levels of biological information, including (i)
cell type, (ii) neighbourhood composition, (iii) cell nucleus morphology, and (iv) single-cell RNA
expression. GHIST leverages its multitask DL architecture with four prediction heads
(corresponding to the information types) to jointly learn these types of information for each cell.
Features and predictions provided by each prediction head are used between different prediction
heads, as an input or through training losses that help the model to learn the interdependencies.
The design of the prediction heads and loss functions is informed by biological knowledge to
capture interdependencies between information types. For example, the composition of the local
neighbourhood is used to inform gene expression prediction, and gene expression within cells are
used to predict cell type to ensure the expressions are biologically meaningful (details in Methods).
This design allows GHIST to elucidate the variations in gene expression within single cells from
H&E images, and enables better predictions of expressions for cell types that are difficult to
distinguish in histology (see Methods and Supplementary Figure 1).
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 4 =====
GHIST effectively captures gene expression at single-cell resolution
We used a range of evaluation metrics including cell type proportion, spatially variable genes
(SVGs), and correlation to evaluate the reliability of the gene expressions predicted by GHIST.
Here we define the “ground truth” single-cell expressions as those obtained through carrying out
cell segmentation on SST data, while the cell types were obtained by applying a standard
supervised cell annotation tool, scClassify, on the expressions (details in Methods). Figure 2a-d
and Supplementary Figure 2 compare the cell types predicted based on the predicted
expressions from GHIST to the ground truth cell types for two breast samples. The cell type
distributions on the slides (Figures 2a and 2c), including overall cell type composition (Figures 2b
and 2d), were strikingly similar between the ground truth and the predictions, showing that the
predicted gene expression by GHIST successfully maintained cell type information of the samples.
Next, we examine if the predicted expression values are accurate by examining the correlation
between predicted and ground truth expressions amongst spatially variable genes (SVGs) or highly
variable genes (HVGs). Using Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD) as an example, we observe a
strong agreement between the ground truth and predicted gene expression across the slide
(Figure 2e and Figure 2f). We calculated the correlation between the predicted and measured
(ground truth) intensities for the SVGs and the non-SVGs. We found a high correlation between the
predicted and measured expression of SVGs, representing biologically meaningful genes, with the
top 20 and top 50 SVGs having median correlations of 0.7 and 0.6, respectively (Figure 2g). In
contrast, as we do not anticipate correlation between two sets of white noise data, genes with low
expression should not have correlation between predicted and measured intensities.
Consequently, among the non-SVGs, which included many low-expressed genes, we observed a
very low correlation of 0 to 0.1, as expected. Some highly correlated SVGs included SCD (r =
0.74), FASN (r = 0.77), FOXA1 (r = 0.8) and EPCAM (r = 0.84) (Figure 2h) which are meaningful
genes with known associations with breast cancer19 20 21 22. Similar results are observed when we
focus on highly variable genes (HVGs) (Supplementary Figure 3a-b). Finally, GHIST was applied
to two additional datasets - lung adenocarcinoma and melanoma - for which strong agreement
between predicted and ground truth cell type proportions is observed (Supplementary Figures 4
and 5, melanoma r = 0.92 and lung adenocarcinoma r = 0.97), demonstrating that GHIST is
applicable to other cancer tissues.
GHIST is extendable to spot-based technologies and outperforms state-of-the-art methods
GHIST can be easily adapted to predict spot-based SGE. Here, we use an existing benchmarking
framework proposed for spot-base methods15 to establish the extensibility of our method. Using the
HER2ST dataset23, we first evaluated the spot-based SGE predictions with metrics commonly used
in the literature such as Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and Structural Similarity Index
(SSIM) across all genes for each method. Figure 3a and 3-b shows that our method achieved the
highest PCC of 0.16 (compared to 0.14 for ST-Net and 0.11 for DeepPT), and SSIM of 0.10
(compared to 0.08 for ST-Net and 0.07 for DeepPT). Next, we note that the performance of our
method on the top five biologically meaningful genes (Figure 3c) had the highest correlation
compared to other methods, with GNAS (r = 0.42), FASN (r = 0.42), SCD (r = 0.34), MYL12B (r =
0.32), and CLDN4 (r = 0.32), indicating one should examine correlation among genes with
meaningful biological signal. Thus, with the limitation of the PCC values in mind, we examined
more meaningful gene characteristics metrics, as discussed in our recent benchmarking work15,
where we evaluated based on top 10% of HVGs and top 20 SVGs. Figures 3d and 3e, and
Supplementary Figure 6 show that our method provided the highest PCC in HVGs (0.20) and
SVGs (0.27), and also SSIM in HVGs (0.17) and SVGs (0.26). Together, these results demonstrate
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 5 =====
that GHIST predicted SGEs that were more aligned to the ground truth SGE than existing methods
and that it improves over existing spot-based methods.
Moreover, we tested the translational potential of predicted SGE for downstream applications using
selected TCGA-BRCA cancer individuals. Here we converted the predicted SGE to pseudobulk GE
for each patient, and built multivariate Cox regression models from the pseudobulk GE to predict
survival using a 3-fold cross validation with 100 repeats (Figure 3f). The corresponding RNA-Seq
and a subset (RNA-Seq-STgene), comprising only genes present in the HER2ST dataset, were
used as baselines for survival analysis. GHIST achieved the highest average C-index of 0.57,
compared to 0.55 for RNA-Seq-STgene. Next, we binarised the risk model predictions of each
patient and split them into high and low-risk groups based on the median risk prediction, then
constructed Kaplan-Meier (KM) survival curves (Figure 3g). GHIST showed translational potential
by demonstrating a significant difference in survival profiles between individuals from different risk
categories (p = 0.017).
GHIST is scalable and translatable when applied to TCGA data
To examine the GHIST model in practice, we also applied the model in its default single-cell
expression setting directly to a TCGA-BRCA HER2+ cohort consisting of 92 patients (defined by
patient metadata, details in Methods). The TCGA data is a multi-omics collection, containing
histological images, bulk RNA-sequencing data, whole genome sequencing (WGS) data, and other
information such as proteomics. We used the histological image as the input to obtain predicted
expressions of 280 genes in individual cells. Figure 4a illustrates the predicted expressions for
H&E patches from two individual samples. We show the UMAP of the cell type compositions for
each individual in Figure 4b (top right panels). Next, we examine the location of the expression for
two marker genes; DSP which is a marker of malignant cells, and SFRP4, which is more highly
expressed in the adjacent tumour microenvironment (Figure 4b and Supplementary Figure 7).
These observations are consistent with the general assumption that the tumour exists as a
confined structure while other cell types such as fibroblasts and macrophages form the adjacent
tumour microenvironment. Figure 4c shows the overall cell type proportion for all 92 individuals,
consisting mostly of malignant cells, followed by stromal cells as expected. Two patients had
minimal predicted malignant cells, and we found their H&E slides to have poor stain quality as
assessed by a pathologist (Supplementary Figure 8, Supplementary Table 1, and Methods ).
Using GHIST, we generated spatially resolved single-cell expression of the TCGA data, thereby
contributing a new modality to the TCGA multi-omics collection.
Potential of GHIST to create a in silico modality for multi-view and multi-omics analysis
We demonstrate the analytical potential of GHIST through multiple downstream analyses, such as
survival analysis and differential state expression, using predicted single-cell data. Using the same
selected subset of TCGA patients, we examined if the predicted gene expression is associated
with survival outcomes. Firstly, we investigated the different types of features that can be extracted
from the SGE predicted by GHIST. We revealed that the cell type information enabled by GHIST
was able to differentiate high- and low-risk patients (Figure 5a, Supplementary Figure 9). While
the cell type specific gene expression (chi-sq = 2.16) was marginally better in separating the risk
groups compared with TCGA bulk RNA-seq (chi-sq = 1.9), we observed that L statistics (chi-sq =
6.34), which represents the spatial association of cell types, achieved a significant p-value of
0.012.
Next, we examined disease subtype detection by comparing oestrogen receptor positive
(ER+)/progesterone receptor positive (PR+) and oestrogen receptor negative (ER-)/progesterone
receptor negative (PR-) patients, which are known to have distinct survival outcomes24 (Figure 5b).
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 6 =====
Cell-type-specific analysis uncovered differential state genes specific to macrophage and stromal
cells, such as LPL, CAVIN2, TIMP4, ADIPOQ, and GZMK. We further observed that these genes
exhibited heterogeneity within the ER+/PR+ group, where one subgroup had lower expression
similar to the ER-/PR- group, while the other subgroup had higher expression. We show that the
high and low expression pattern is not a technical artefact through volcano plots, where there are a
similar number of up-regulated and down-regulated genes between cluster 1 and cluster 2 for all
cell types (Supplementary Figure 10). Figure 5c shows the results of unsupervised clustering on
the ER+/PR+ individuals, demonstrating that cell-type-specific information enabled us to uncover
patient heterogeneity within the ER+/PR+ population. In cluster 1, the higher expression of LPL,
CAVIN2, and TIMP4 within macrophage cells, and ADIPOQ in stromal cells, was associated with
better survival (Supplementary Figure 11a). Conversely, lower expression was associated with
poorer survival. This finding is consistent with the functions of these genes, where lower
expression implies impaired metabolic and immune functions.
To further investigate the features whether there exists potential differential patterns between these
two clusters, we employed a classification approach to assess the discriminatory potential of
spatial patterns compared to cell type-specific expression patterns. We used scFeatures25 to
generate a series of feature types and revealed that spatial metrics for differential spatial patterns,
such as Moran's I and nearest neighbour correlation (Moran's I accuracy= 0.64 and nearest
neighbour correlation accuracy = 0.66), also exhibited discrimination capacity (Figure 5d). As
expected, cell-type-specific gene expression (accuracy = 0.87) has a strong discrimination capacity
as the clusters were initially defined by this measure. The spatial pattern-based feature type,
nearest neighbour correlation, captures the composition and distribution of cell types in various
local regions. Features that demonstrate differential patterning (as defined by nearest neighbour
correlation) includes TNFRSF17, CD19, KRT23, KRT7, TRAF4 (Supplementary Figure 11b),
which all have a higher expression correlation with neighbouring cells in cluster 2 which
correspond to better survival patients. These findings highlight the power of GHIST in uncovering
additional spatial insights beyond the bulk gene expression data available in TCGA.
Analysis between somatic CNA and NN correlation reveals that several genomic regions
affect the spatial pattern of gene expression
Somatic copy number alteration (SCNA) has been revealed as a prognostic biomarker for breast
cancer, and can often result in gene expression changes26,27. We extended the concept of
differential expression analysis to define differential patterning (DP) genes as genes showing a
difference in nearest neighbour correlation between samples of interest, where nearest neighbour
correlation reflects the degree of spatial clustering or dispersion of different cell types. Here, we
investigated the effect of gene gain/loss on spatial patterning of gene expression. First, we
selected somatic copy number genes (with gain frequency >=5 and loss frequency >= 5 in 91
patients; one patient did not have CNA data) from the whole genome, which resulted in 2,177
genes in total. Next, for each of the SCNA genes, we performed a DP analysis to identify DP
genes between samples showing gene gain versus samples showing gene loss for each SCNA
based on the predicted expression of the 280 genes. We identified transacting hotspots associated
with a large number of DP genes (p-value < 1.25 × 10-3, Figure 5d, Supplementary Table 2),
termed DP hotspots including loci on chromosomes 1, 8, 17q. Our results recapitulated some
well-known genomic regions that have been previously reported to be associated with cancer risk
and gene expression. For example, the DP hotspots on chromosome 8 are around the known
“8q24 gene desert” that has been associated with prostate, colon and breast cancer28–31. Other DP
hotspots on chromosome 17 were located in 17q11-21, which happened to be the amplified region
containing HER2. We observe that gain/loss TOP2A is associated with the spatial expression of 28
genes (Figure 5e, Supplementary Table 3). TOP2A is a cancer chemotherapy target32, and its
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 7 =====
copy number variation has been revealed as a predictive biomarker of chemotherapy of breast
cancer33,34. Taken together, our results suggest that the predicted spatial gene expression pattern is
a powerful new modality that enables previously unexplored questions relating copy number
alterations and differential patterning.
Discussion
Here we presented GHIST, a novel approach for predicting single-cell SGE from histology images.
GHIST leverages multitask DL strategies to map H&E images (three channels, RGB) to a
collection of cell-level spatially resolved transcriptomic images, by leveraging joint learning of cell
nuclei morphology, cell type information, neighbourhood information, and gene expressions.
GHIST is the first method to predict at single-cell resolution. We then demonstrated that GHIST
can also be applied to spot-based resolution data and is able to outperform state-of-the-art
spot-based approaches. We then showed that we can generate spatially resolved gene expression
at single-cell level for breast cancer images in TCGA in silico, thereby contributing a new modality
to enrich downstream analysis.
The application of GHIST to TCGA demonstrated a strong capacity for discrimination based on
overall expression, cell type-specific expression, and varying spatial patterns. GHIST is able to
achieve this even with a limited number of slides or samples. We believe this is possible because
of the large amount of information observed across the whole tissue section during training and the
large number of cells within each slide. In practice, the training data examined thousands of
high-resolution patches from a slide containing about 80,000 cells, allowing the model to capture
intricate details and subtle variations, and thus ensuring strong practical performance even when
trained on very limited samples. While the number of slides is limited, we are effectively learning
from a larger number of matched cells from H&E images and gene expression measurements.
This contributes to the model's ability to generalise across H&E images from different cohorts,
leading to robust and reliable predictions in real-world applications. We anticipate an increase in
model robustness with the availability of more training data.
The TCGA-BRCA samples have currently been assayed by 10 different experimental strategies,
including genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics. Our spatially resolved gene expression
measurements complement these existing modalities, providing a spatial omics modality across all
of the samples in the collections. Further to this, H&E is a ubiquitous, routinely used histological
technique applied in standard clinical practice to provide prognostic information that informs clinical
management of nearly all cancers. As such, H&E is widely available with detailed clinical
information in our health systems. GHIST can enrich these large collections of existing H&E data
by enabling large-scale generation of spatially resolved gene expression profiles, facilitating
comprehensive analysis and discoveries. As high quality training datasets continue to be
generated, there is a clear opportunity to increase the availability of this additional spatial modality
for other cancer types in the TCGA, and other databases and sample collections. This will enable
researchers to investigate SGE patterns to formulate hypotheses about disease mechanisms and
cell interactions, or alternatively, allow researchers to pre-examine potential results in silico before
conducting costly and time-consuming experiments.
Many current H&E approaches are limited in their ability to identify a diverse range of cell
types35–37. For instance, the dataset created by the Breast Cancer Segmentation Grant Challenge38
focuses on discriminating four key cell types: tumour, stroma, inflammatory, and necrosis. In
contrast, we can predict double the number of cell types using our approach. This expanded
capability provides a more detailed and nuanced understanding of the tissue microenvironment. It
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 8 =====
is important to note that the further expansion of identifiable cell types is tightly linked to the
availability of data and the design of gene panels. Compared to scRNA-seq data, where thousands
of genes are measured and many cell types are marked by the expression of dozens of genes,
spatial transcriptomics gene panels with 300-500 non-specific genes may limit our capacity to
discriminate cell types if marker genes are not present. For example, in our application to breast
cancer, identifying myoepithelial cells, the absence of which distinguish in situ from invasive ductal
carcinoma, is challenging because commonly stained markers such as P63 are not available in the
panel. This highlights the importance of customised gene panel design, a service offered by most
vendors, and the power of newly emerging algorithms in this area (e.g., geneBasis39 and
gpsFISH40). We believe that incorporating many of these considerations going forward by our
community will greatly enhance the precision and utility of spatial gene expression predictions,
allowing for more comprehensive and accurate tissue analysis.
The power of SGE prediction also lies in its potential to gain deeper insights into disease
mechanisms through additional spatial information. This allows us to not only determine whether a
particular gene is expressed but also where it is expressed and its relative patterning. Such
capability enables us to explore whether specific gene expression patterns can further delineate
breast cancer subtypes. Our results show that the spatial features including the L statistic
(representing the spatial association of cell types), Moran’s I (representing the spatial patterning of
gene expression), and nearest neighbour correlation (representing the correlation of genes with
neighbouring cells), achieved high discriminating power in both survival and classification analysis.
Such exploration would not be possible with the existing bulk RNA-sequencing data in TCGA.
These findings underscore the power of GHIST in enabling researchers to examine histology
images with a spatial resolution that was previously unattainable.
During application of GHIST to TCGA data, we have noticed quality issues with H&E slides,
such as variable, under- or over-staining (Supplementary Table 1), which affect the
predictions of a trained DL model. Thus there is a need to account for the quality of H&E
slides prior to the application of our model, as interpretation of suboptimal slides should be
avoided, as per current histopathology practice. It is known that the quality of H&E staining is
dependent on artefacts that are attributed to multiple factors from formalin fixation to tissue
processing, including thick and thin sectioning, processing temperatures and times, and
batch effects from different tissue processors7,41. To increase clinical utility, there is potential
to optimise various aspects of H&E protocols with the aim of increasing accuracy associated
with SGE prediction. This includes both wet lab protocols, such as standardising staining
techniques, optimal fixation and implementing rigorous QC measures, and computational
approaches implementing advanced image pre-processing such as stain normalisation and
leveraging foundation models trained on a large number of H&E images. Integrating these
optimised protocols will lead to more reliable identification of spatial patterns in gene
expression and deeper insights into disease mechanisms.
Conclusion
Here, we introduced a multitask DL approach that enables the prediction of single-cell SGE from
histology images by learning from H&E and SST images, and leveraging the relationships between
multiple layers of cellular information. Our new GHIST framework outperformed current
state-of-the-art SGE prediction methods based on spot-based technologies. Additionally, this
framework offers a computational strategy to generate an in silico SGE platform with rich spatial
information, enhancing existing databases. This facilitates the discovery of spatial associations
between biomarkers, offering new insights into cellular biology and disease mechanisms.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 9 =====
Online Methods
Datasets and preprocessing
[A] Subcellular in situ spatial transcriptomics data
(i) BreastCancer1 and BreastCancer2 - The 10x Xenium breast cancer datasets included in this
study were downloaded from
https://www.10xgenomics.com/products/xenium-in-situ/preview-dataset-human-breast (accessed
14 March 2024). BreastCancer1 was characterised as T2N1M0, Stage II-B, ER+/HER2+/PR−.
BreastCancer2 was characterised as stage pT2 pN1a pMX, ER−/HER2+/PR−. The H&E image
was aligned with its corresponding DAPI image for each dataset and visually verified. The overall
pixel dimensions (h × w) of the H&E images were 25,778 × 35,416 for BreastCancer1, and
24,890 × 34,142 for BreastCancer2.
Nuclei were segmented from the H&E images using Hover-Net37 that was pre-trained on the
CoNSeP dataset. The PyTorch weights of the segmentation-only model were downloaded from the
official GitHub repository. The whole slide images (WSI) H&E were divided into non-overlapping
patches that were 3,000 × 3,000 pixels in size (or smaller patch sizes along WSI border for
remainder pixels), and Hover-Net was applied to the patches. Nuclei detected from two adjacent
patches that overlap along the patch borders were merged together to a single nucleus, to avoid
division of a nucleus into more than one segment.
BIDCell42 was applied to the transcripts and DAPI data to segment cells in the Xenium datasets
and extract the gene expressions within whole cells. Low-quality transcripts for Xenium data with a
phred-scaled quality value score below 20 were removed, as suggested by the vendor43. Irrelevant
data including negative control transcripts, blanks, and antisense transcripts were filtered out.
There were 313 unique genes for BreastCancer1 and 280 genes for BreastCancer2. For BIDCell,
default parameter values from the exemplar file for Xenium and the provided single-cell reference
file were used (both files were downloaded from the official BIDCell repository, version 1.0.3).
To find the corresponding gene expressions of cells detected from the subcellular SGE data and
cells detected from H&E, the amount of overlap between nuclei from the two data types was
computed. An H&E nucleus had a matching subcellular SGE nucleus if the amount of overlap
between two corresponding nuclei was at least 50% of the area of the H&E nucleus. Cells with 0
total expression counts, cells classified as ‘unassigned’ by scClassify, and those with a nucleus
smaller than 10
were filtered out. This resulted in a total of 94k cells with single-cell expression
µ𝑚
2
for BreastCancer1, and 80k cells for BreastCancer2. The count matrix output for the segmented
cells from BIDCell was used to classify the cell types.
(ii) LungAdenocarcinoma - The 10x Xenium lung adenocarcinoma dataset with multimodal cell
segmentation was downloaded from
https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/preview-data-ffpe-human-lung-cancer-with-xenium-multim
odal-cell-segmentation-1-standard (accessed 21 February 2024). The H&E image was aligned with
its corresponding DAPI image for each dataset and visually verified. The overall pixel dimensions
(h × w) of the H&E image was 17,098 × 51,187. There were 377 unique genes in this dataset.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 10 =====
The same process used to segment nuclei from the H&E images for the breast cancer datasets
was applied to the LungAdenocarcinoma dataset. We used the cell segmentation provided in the
downloaded data bundle, that was achieved through the multimodal cell segmentation pipeline
from 10x Genomics.
The same process was used to determine the corresponding cells detected in H&E and subcellular
SGE data and perform filtering of cells for the LungAdenocarcinoma dataset as the breast cancer
datasets. For LungAdenocarcinoma, overlap was calculated with cells in the SGE data, rather than
nuclei. This resulted in a total of 89k H&E cells with single-cell expression for
LungAdenocarcinoma. The count matrix provided in the downloaded data bundle was used to
classify the cell types.
(iii) Melanoma - The 10x Xenium melanoma dataset was downloaded from
https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/human-skin-preview-data-xenium-human-skin-gene-expre
ssion-panel-add-on-1-standard (accessed 4 April 2024). The H&E image was aligned with its
corresponding DAPI image for each dataset and visually verified. The overall pixel dimensions
(h × w) of the H&E image was 27,276 × 31,262. There were 382 unique genes in this dataset.
The same data processing steps as for the other Xenium datasets were applied to the Melanoma
dataset. For this dataset, we used the gene expressions within nuclei. Post filtering, there were a
total of 47k H&E cells with single-cell expression. The count matrix output for the segmented nuclei
used to classify the cell types.
[B] scRNA-seq reference data sets used in cell type classification
For each data, we used scClassify44 version 1.12.0, a supervised single-cell annotation tool to
annotate the cell types of each cell, that uses reference data with known cell types. The following
scRNA-seq references are used for building the pre-trained model for cell annotations.
●
Single-cell breast reference - a publicly available breast cancer dataset from 10x
(https://www.10xgenomics.com/products/xenium-in-situ/preview-dataset-human-breast) as
the reference to annotate the breast sample slides. The processing of the dataset is the
same as detailed in our previous publication42.
●
Single-cell melanoma reference - we used the pre-processed melanoma dataset obtained
from Durante et al.45 as it contains comprehensive annotations. We used the annotation
provided, and grouped “Class 1A Primary Tumor Cells”, “Class 2 PRAME+ Primary Tumor
Cells” , “Class 1B PRAME+ Met Tumor Cells” and “Class 2 PRAME- Primary Tumor Cells”
into "Tumor"; “M2 Macrophages”, “M1 Macrophages” and “Monocyte” into "Macrophages";
“CD8, T Effector Memory”, “CD8, T Resident Memory” , “Cytotoxic CD8”, “Naive T Cells”
and “T Regulatory Cells” into "T Cells".
●
Single-cell lung reference - we used the pre-processed lung atlas data from the CZI
CELLXGENE data portal (
https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/6f6d381a-7701-4781-935c-db10d30de293) as
it is one of the largest collections of single-cell lung data. We used the level 2 annotation in
the ann_level_2 metadata column. We selected the main cell types “blood vessels”, “airway
epithelium”, “alveolar epithelium”, “fibroblast lineage”, “lymphatic EC”, “lymphoid”, “myeloid”,
and “smooth muscle”. We grouped “airway epithelium” and “alveolar epithelium” into
“epithelium”.
[C] HER2ST spatial transcriptomics dataset
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 11 =====
The Human HER2+ breast tumour (HER2ST) dataset23 was measured using SRT to investigate
SGE in HER2+ breast tumours, from which the original investigators discovered shared gene
signatures for immune and tumour processes. The dataset consists of 36 samples of HER2+
breast tissue sections from 8 patients.
For the histology images, 224 × 224 pixel patches were extracted around each sequencing spot.
For GHIST, the patches were centre-cropped at 112 × 112 pixels and resized to 256 × 256 pixels,
so that the resolution is suitable for the nuclei segmentation model trained on NuCLS, and to be
consistent with single-cell settings. For the SGE data of each tissue section, the top 1,000 HVGs
for each section were considered and those genes that were expressed in less than 1,000 spots
across all tissue sections were excluded. This resulted in 785 genes for the training of all models.
[D] NuCLS datasets
The NuCLS dataset46 was used to provide cell segmentation and cell type labels for the HER2ST
dataset, to enable the training of GHIST to predict spot-level gene expressions. The NuCLS
dataset was downloaded from https://github.com/PathologyDataScience/BCSS (accessed 18
February 2024), and contains annotations of over 220,000 nuclei from breast cancer H&E images
from TCGA. The annotations include a mixture of region-level (rectangular) masks and nuclei-level
(outlining nuclei boundary) masks for individual nuclei. The annotations were created through a
crowdsourcing approach involving pathologists, pathology residents, and medical students. There
were 1,744 H&E patches in the dataset. The “classes” level of annotations were used as cell type
labels for nuclei. The classes include 6 cell types: “lymphocytes”, “macrophages”, “stromal cells”,
“plasma cells”, “tumour cells”, and “other”.
The original nuclei masks provided in the NuCLS were unsuitable to be directly used for
segmentation training, due to the presence of coarse rectangular nuclei masks. Hover-Net
(pre-trained on the CoNSeP dataset, weights downloaded from the official GitHub repository) was
applied to the NuCLS H&E patches to generate fine-grained nuclei-level masks (as pseudo ground
truth masks). Due to inconsistencies in the sizes of H&E patches, four 270 × 270 patches were
cropped from each image, from each corner of the original patch, and used as input to perform
segmentation.
For every ground truth nucleus, centroids of pseudo nuclei within the area of the ground truth
nucleus mask were found. The pseudo nucleus with the centroid closest by Euclidean distance to
the centroid of the ground truth nucleus was deemed the corresponding nucleus. The ground truth
cell type label was assigned to the matched pseudo nucleus mask and used to train Hover-Net
from scratch to perform simultaneous nuclei segmentation and predict the cell type of the 6 types
in the labels. Training was performed with a random training split of 90% of available patches, and
default model hyperparameters were applied. The model was trained for a total of 100 epochs;
only decoders for the first 50 epochs, and all layers for another 50 epochs, as per default settings.
The model from the final epoch was applied to the HER2ST data to generate labels to train GHIST.
[E] TCGA-BRCA dataset
Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas Breast Cancer (TCGA-BRCA)47 were used to evaluate model
generalisability. This dataset was chosen as the predictions on these H&E images could be
evaluated through the matched gene expression, survival data, and other “omics”. TCGA-BRCA
data was downloaded using the TCGAbiolinks package48 version 2.29.6.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 12 =====
RNA-Seq data was obtained by following query options: project = “TCGA-BRCA”, data.category =
”Transcriptome Profiling”, data.type = ”Gene Expression Quantification”, experimental.strategy =
"RNA-Seq", and workflow.type="STAR - Counts".
Histology images were obtained by the following query: project = "TCGA-BRCA", data.category =
"Biospecimen", data.type = "Slide Image", and experimental.strategy = "Diagnostic Slide".
Clinical (metadata) with variables for defining breast cancer subtypes for samples were
downloaded from the TCGAretriever package version 1.9.1.
Somatic copy number alteration was downloaded from UCSC Xena (Genomic Data Commons
(GDC) TCGA Breast Cancer).
We only considered images that had one associated RNA-Seq entry and were either stage I, stage
III, or stage IIA due to storage limitations. In our study, we focused on the HER2+ breast cancer
subtype from TCGA-BRCA, as this was the subtype of the data (BreastCancer2 and HER2ST)
used to train the model. We selected the HER2+ patients based on a positive entry in the
“lab_proc_her2_neu_immunohistochemistry_receptor_status” metadata column 49.
Overall we considered 92 TCGA samples consisting of matched images, RNA-seq data, somatic
copy number data, and clinical data.
H&E processing - Images were read using the openslide-python library, and non-overlapping 256 ×
256 patches were then cropped from the highest resolution level of the WSIs. The patches were
filtered out if the sum of the RGB values were greater (or more white) than a patch with RGB
(220,220,220).
Nuclei were segmented from the patches using Hover-Net. We found that the stain colour affected
the number of nuclei that the pre-trained model predicted, so the patches underwent stain
normalisation. The torchstain package (version 1.3.0)50 was used to apply the Macenko
normalisation method51 to each H&E patch. The reference was an unnormalised patch from a
TCGA-BRCA H&E WSI for which Hover-Net performed well visually.
Macenko stain normalisation was also applied to the original TCGA H&E patches when input to
GHIST. Here, the reference image was the whole H&E image from Xenium, downsampled such
that 1 pixel = 10 μm.
Spatially resolved single-cell Gene expression from HISTology (GHIST)
Overview of GHIST
GHIST is a Deep Learning (DL) framework that considers the relationships between multiple layers
of biological information to predict spatially resolved gene expressions within individual cells from
visual information captured in H&E-stained histology images. GHIST uses two types of input data
at inference: (i) H&E images, and (ii) optionally, average gene expression profiles of cell types from
reference datasets, such as the Human Cell Atlas. During training, subcellular SGE data are used
to quantify single-cell gene expressions for the paired H&E image to enable the framework to learn
relationships between H&E images and gene expressions within cells. Once trained, the
framework can infer single-cell SGE from H&E images without requiring SGE data.
A major innovation in developing GHIST is the harnessing of the complex relationships between
the histological appearance of cells, gene expression within cells, cell type, and composition of
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 13 =====
neighbouring cell types. This multilayered approach enhances the capacity of the framework to
better discern the spatial gene expression patterns reflected by H&E, thereby facilitating greater
biological insights. These different types of information are integrated by considering them as
prediction tasks in the multitask DL framework of GHIST. The primary task of GHIST is spatially
resolved gene expression prediction within individual cells, and this is supported by three auxiliary
helper tasks (morphology, cell type, and neighbourhood composition):
(A) Visual information that describe nuclei morphology and cell type
The visual appearance of tissues, cells, and nuclei reflects underlying biological information.
GHIST extracts information regarding nuclei morphology, texture, and the appearance of the
environment and neighbouring cells from H&E images. This is learned through a backbone
network that performs joint nuclei segmentation and classification. Nuclei-level and patch-level
features from the backbone are combined together. These features are fed into two auxiliary (cell
type and neighbourhood composition) and primary prediction tasks downstream, so that these
tasks receive a comprehensive embedding of information from H&E images.
The backbone is parameterised by a set of learnable parameters θ of a DL segmentation model.
The backbone predicts the probability of cell type classes and background at each pixel. In this
way, the model learns the relationships between pixels with morphology and cell type. We used the
popular UNet 3+52 (without the deep supervision component) as the backbone of our framework to
perform nuclei segmentation and classification. This backbone architecture may be swapped out
for other segmentation architectures. The architecture comprised an encoding branch and
decoding branch with five levels of feature scales, and incorporated full-scale skip connections that
combined low-level details with high-level features across different scales (resolutions).
(B) Cell type information
The level of expression of genes in a cell is directly related to its cell type, as different cell types
are known to be associated with distinct expression profiles and different marker genes. GHIST
harnesses the relationship between gene expressions and cell type by carrying out cell type
prediction as an auxiliary task in its multitask framework. This serves three key purposes: (i)
incentivises the extraction of visual features that target cell type, which implicitly informs the gene
expression profile of the cell; (ii) provides an alternative means of assessing and penalising the
predicted expressions during training; and (iii) assists with the estimation of the composition of cell
types within a local neighbourhood (see below for section Neighbourhood characteristics). As a
result, the framework can also better extract meaningful features that improve the prediction of
gene expressions.
To achieve point (ii), during training, the predicted gene expressions are used as input to another
component in the framework to predict cell type. This allows the framework to learn single-cell
expressions that reflect characteristic profiles that correspond to different cell types.
(C) Neighbourhood characteristics
Cells are known to exhibit particular patterns of spatial organisation in tumours, with different
compositional patterns in local neighbourhoods53,54. Thus, we incorporate a module that learns to
estimate the neighbourhood cell type composition of a given input patch as a further type of
auxiliary output prediction. This provides two key benefits: (i) ensures that the combination of
low-level features from individual cells is coherent with the local neighbourhood, and (ii) aids with
discerning cell types that are visually challenging to distinguish in H&E images. As an example in
breast cancer, B and T cell nuclei exhibit remarkably similar visual characteristics. B cells tend to
be mistaken as T cells when the frequency of T cells is relatively dominant. These cell types often
occur together in local neighbourhoods. We leverage this knowledge in GHIST by using the
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 14 =====
estimated neighbourhood composition to capture a more comprehensive view of the cellular
environment in H&E images.
(D) Spatially resolved gene expression in individual cells
The integration of the three components above allows the main task, single-cell SGE prediction, to
be facilitated by the different interrelated biological information. Once trained, GHIST predicts the
expression of hundreds of genes for every nuclei detected in an H&E image, without requiring
additional cell type, neighbourhood composition, or SRT information as inputs. GHIST can
leverage averaged gene expression profiles of various cell types from single-cell references of the
target tissue type as an optional input (ablation results in Supplementary Figure 1). The selection
of the reference data is flexible, as GHIST does not require a matched single-cell reference for the
same sample of interest, the cell types do not need to align with the cell types being predicted,
multiple reference datasets may be used, and some reference datasets may contain different cell
types.
[A] Extraction of visual information
The input to the model is a cropped patch from the H&E WSIs,
, where
is the height of
𝑥∈ℜ
ℎ×𝑤×3
ℎ
the patch, and
is the width of the patch, and 3 corresponds to the RGB colour channels. All the
𝑤
cells in an input patch are processed simultaneously during one forward pass, thereby allowing the
model to flexibly support patches containing an arbitrary number of cells.
The backbone predicts an output of shape
, where each element represents the
[ℎ,  𝑤,  𝑛𝐶𝑇+ 1]
probability of each cell type or background class at each pixel. During training, the backbone is
trained carry out nuclei segmentation and cell type classification by minimising the loss function:
(1)
𝐿𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑝ℎ =
1
𝑁𝑖=1
𝑁
∑
𝑗=1
𝑀
∑𝐼𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖𝑗) ,
where
is the number of pixels,
is the number of classes (cell types, and background),
is a
𝑁
𝑀
𝐼𝑖𝑗
binary indicator of whether class
is the correct classification for pixel
(1 if true, 0 otherwise), and
𝑗
𝑖
is the predicted probability that pixel
belongs to class .
is only relevant during training, and
𝑝𝑖𝑗
𝑖
𝑗𝑀
depends on the granularity of the cell types of interest. In our experiments, we found PCC of
predicted SGE with ground truth to reduce for large
(see Discussion).
𝑀
Nuclei-level features are extracted by multiplying nuclei masks for all valid nuclei in the input patch
elementwise to the feature volumes produced by the first and last convolutional layers within the
backbone architecture. The resulting features are concatenated along the feature dimension, then
the features within each nuclei are summed and normalised by the size of the nucleus in pixels.
This is done to counter the variability in nuclei sizes. This yields a unique feature vector with a
dimension of 384. Furthermore, patch-level features are calculated by averaging the same two
feature volumes across the patch. Each nucleus-level feature vector is concatenated with the
patch-level feature vector of its corresponding patch. This is then processed through two fully
connected layers with ReLU activation, to generate the resulting final feature vector that describes
the morphology of each nucleus
. This describes nuclei-level and patch-level visual
𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠∈ℜ
1×256
features that are relevant to nuclei morphology, cell type, and the local neighbourhood from H&E
image.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 15 =====
[B] Leveraging cell type information
The cell type prediction module uses the extracted visual features of each nucleus,
, to
𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠
predict the cell type of the nucleus. The module comprises a fully connected layer
(256-dimensional intermediate features), followed by ReLU activation, and another fully connected
layer that predicts the probability of each cell type. The argmax function is applied to obtain the
predicted classes. This module is trained by minimising:
(2)
𝐿𝐶𝑇, 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 = 1
𝐶𝑖=1
𝐶
∑
𝑗=1
𝑀
∑𝐼𝑖𝑗𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖𝑗) ,
where
is the number of cells (i.e., nuclei),
is the number of classes (cell types),
is a binary
𝐶
𝑀
𝐼𝑖𝑗
indicator of whether class
is the correct classification for cell
(1 if true, 0 otherwise), and
is
𝑗
𝑖
𝑝𝑖𝑗
the predicted probability that cell
belongs to class .
𝑖
𝑗
We introduce another module with the same composition of layers as the cell type prediction
module, with three associated training losses,
,
, and
(defined below) that
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑠
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟
work in tandem. This module separately takes as input the predicted expressions and ground truth
expressions, and predicts the corresponding cell type for each set of input expressions.
●
is the cross-entropy loss (Equation 2), computed exclusively when the inputs are the
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟
predicted expressions.
●
addresses the consistency of intermediate representations derived from the
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑
ground truth and predicted input expressions, and is written as:
(3)
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑= 1
𝐶𝑖=1
𝐶
∑
1 −𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑥𝑝𝑟,𝑖, 𝑥𝑔𝑡,𝑖)
(
) ,
where
is the embedding for the predicted (“pr”) expressions of cell , and
is the
𝑥𝑝𝑟,𝑖
𝑖
𝑥𝑔𝑡,𝑖
embedding for the ground truth (“gt”) expressions of the cell.
●
addresses the consistency between the predicted cell types derived from predicted
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑠 
and ground truth gene expressions for a given cell:
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑠=  1
𝐶𝑖=1
𝐶
∑
𝑝𝑝𝑟,𝑖−𝑝𝑔𝑡,𝑖
(
)
2,
(4)
where
is the output cell type logits given the predicted expressions of cell , and
is
𝑝𝑝𝑟,𝑖
𝑖
𝑝𝑔𝑡,𝑖
the output cell type logits given the ground truth expressions of the cell.
Taken together, predicted single-cell expressions are encouraged to resemble profiles that better
correspond to cell types.
[C] Leveraging neighbourhood characteristics
GHIST estimates the composition of cell types in each input H&E patch. This module comprises
two fully connected layers with ReLU activation, with the last layer outputting the same number of
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 16 =====
elements as the number of cell types in the training data. Each value represents the proportion of
cells of a particular cell type in a patch. Softmax activation is used to ensure the compositions sum
to 1 for each patch. The input to this module is the average of
for all nuclei in a patch.
𝑥𝑓𝑣, 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠
This neighbourhood composition (NC) module is trained by minimising
and
, calculated
𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑒𝑠𝑡
𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑝𝑟
for a given patch defined as:
=
(5)
𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑒𝑠𝑡
𝐷𝐾𝐿𝑃𝑒𝑠𝑡||𝑄
(
) =
𝑗=1
𝑀
∑𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑔
𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡(𝑗)
𝑄(𝑗) ,    
where
is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the cell type compositions estimated
𝐷𝐾𝐿
from the neighbourhood composition module
, and the ground truth compositions
, and
𝑃𝑒𝑠𝑡
𝑄
𝑗
ranges over all the cell types. Similarly, for a given patch, the loss associated with neighbourhood
composition module given the auxiliary predicted cell types:
=
(6)
𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑝𝑟
𝐷𝐾𝐿𝑃𝐶𝑇||𝑄
(
) =
𝑗=1
𝑀
∑𝑝𝐶𝑇𝑙𝑜𝑔
𝑝𝐶𝑇(𝑗)
𝑄(𝑗) ,    
where
is the composition calculated by summing the predicted cell types (see section
𝑃𝐶𝑇
Leveraging cell type information) and dividing by the total number of cells in a given patch.Thus,
further consistency is imposed between the different layers of biological information within the
model.
The estimated neighbourhood composition provides further utility in accounting for cell types that
are difficult to discern from H&E images. For example, B cells and T cells have similar morphology,
and thus the model becomes biased towards the dominant cell type (usually T cells), while ignoring
the minority cell type (B cells). Based on this, during inference, we use the estimated compositions
to recover missing cell types. For cell type
(e.g., immune cell types including B, myeloid, and T
𝑡
cells):
,
(7)
𝑣𝑡 = α 𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠(𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡,𝑡 − 𝑝𝐶𝑇,𝑡)|Φ𝑡|
where
is the number of cells in the patch,
is sampled from a normal
𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠
Φ𝑡 ~ 𝑁(𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡,𝑡,  1) 
distribution, where
is the number of B, myeloid, and T in the patch from the auxiliary cell type
𝑛𝐼
predictions, and
is an adjustable hyperparameter to allow different recovery rates. We set
to 2
α
α
in our experiments for B, myeloid, and T cell types, and T cells initially predicted with high
confidence (probability above 0.6) were masked from this mechanism. These values were selected
empirically, according to performance on the validation sets. Next, the logits of the initial
predictions
for the cells are revised as follows:
𝑦'𝐶𝑇,𝑡𝑐
.
(8)
𝑦'𝑁𝐶,𝑡𝑐 = 𝑣𝑡+ 𝑦'𝐶𝑇,𝑡𝑐
The final cell type is found by applying argmax across the cell types being refined, while not
affecting other cell types. To ensure consistency, the final expressions are taken from the
corresponding cell type-specific prediction module (see section on Gene expression prediction).
Disease-specific knowledge may also be incorporated into this mechanism (Equations 7 and 8),
e.g., decreasing the relative proportion of epithelial to malignant cells in invasive breast cancer. We
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 17 =====
only demonstrate this mechanism on the breast cancer datasets; it was not applied for the dataset
Melanoma or LungAdenocarcinoma.
[D] Spatially resolved gene expression prediction for individual cells
GHIST predicts the expression value of every gene in each cell in the H&E image,
. The
𝑦' ∈ℜ
𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠
number of genes predicted varies according to the size of the gene panel in the available SST
data. The datasets used in our study had panel sizes ranging from 280 to 382 genes.
The input to this module is the embedding vector
for all nuclei in a patch (with dim =
𝑥 𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠∈ℜ
256
256), and if used, a set of averaged gene expression profiles of various cell types from single-cell
references of the target tissue type
, if this input is used. The reference data does not
𝑅∈ℜ
𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓×𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠
need to be matched for the same sample of interest, and
can represent a flexible number and
𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓
categories of cell types from a single or multiple reference datasets.
is kept the same during
𝑅
training and inference.
GHIST carries out a linear regression to predict
by first predicting
:
𝑦'
𝑊∈ℜ
𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓
,
(9)
𝑊(𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠) =  (𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈(𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠𝑊𝑟
(1) + 𝑏𝑟
(1)))𝑊𝑟
(2) + 𝑏𝑟
(2)
followed by applying softmax along the
dimension, where
𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓
, and
. The
is the expression value of
𝑊𝑟
(1) ∈ℜ
768×256,  𝑏𝑟
(1) ∈ℜ
1×256,  𝑊𝑟
(2) ∈ℜ
256×𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓 
𝑏𝑟
(2) ∈ℜ
1×𝑛𝑟𝑒𝑓
𝑆𝑗
gene
calculated by the weighted sum of references for each cell written as:
𝑗
,
(10)
𝑆𝑗=
𝑘=1
𝐾
∑𝑊𝑘· 𝑅𝑘𝑗
In the setting without using single-cell reference as an input:
,
(11)
𝑆(𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠) =  (𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈(𝑥𝑛𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑢𝑠𝑊𝑒
(1) + 𝑏𝑒
(1)))𝑊𝑒
(2) + 𝑏𝑒
(2)
where
, and
. Next, information about
𝑊𝑒
(1) ∈ℜ
768×256,  𝑏𝑒
(1) ∈ℜ
1×256,  𝑊𝑒
(2) ∈ℜ
256×𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠 
𝑏𝑒
(2) ∈ℜ
1×𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠
the spatial neighbourhood is incorporated using the estimated cell type neighbourhood
composition
of a patch. We use multi-head cross attention (with 8 heads), which are
𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡∈ℜ
𝑛𝐶𝑇
fundamental components in Transformers. For each cell
forms the query, while
forms the key
𝑝𝑒𝑠𝑡
𝑆
and value.
A linear layer is applied to the output of the multi-head cross attention module, resulting in
. Finally, the predicted gene expressions of each cell are computed:
𝑏∈ℜ
𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠
,
(12)
𝑦' = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈(𝑆+ 𝑏)
In the setting without using single-cell reference as an input:
,
(13)
𝑦' = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈(𝑏)
For the spot-based prediction mode,
for all nuclei in a patch are summed together (for
𝑦'
weakly-supervised learning):
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 18 =====
,
(14)
𝑦'𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑡=
𝑖=1
𝐶
∑𝑦'𝑖
The training loss associated with gene expressions is:
(15)
𝐿𝐺𝐸=  1
𝐶𝑖=1
𝐶
∑
𝑦'𝑖−𝑦𝑖
(
)
2,
where
is the gene expressions for cell
obtained from SST. When the estimated neighbourhood
𝑦𝑖
𝑖
compositions are used to recover missing cell types, a copy of the components from Equations 9 to
13 is made for these specific cell types. In this case the loss
is calculated only where these
𝐿𝐺𝐸,𝑎𝑑𝑗
cell types are present.
[E] Model Training
The model was trained by minimising the total loss representing sum of all the losses over N
training patches:
(16)
𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑛
𝑁
∑[𝐿𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑝ℎ+ 𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠+ 𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑+ 𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡𝑠+ 𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑟+ 𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑒𝑠𝑡+ 𝐿𝑁𝐶,𝑝𝑟+
1
𝑁𝐶𝑇𝐿𝐺𝐸,𝑎𝑑𝑗+ 𝐿𝐺𝐸]  
Due to the relatively small value of
observed during training, it was empirically scaled by a
𝐿𝐶𝑇,𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑑
factor of 100.
was inversely scaled by
, the number of cell types in the auxiliary
𝐿𝐺𝐸,𝑎𝑑𝑗
𝑁𝐶𝑇
prediction. There were no further weightings for the other losses, to improve generalisability and
ensure that our losses were not fine-tuned to any particular datasets.
Practical implementation of GHIST
Cross-validation (CV) was carried out for the Xenium and HER2ST datasets. The training set was
used to train parameters of the model. The validation set was used to evaluate models during
training to allow parameters to be tuned. Results presented in the paper were calculated using the
predictions using the test set for each of the four folds of the CV. The same CV splits were used for
each model to ensure fair comparison.
5-fold CV was carried out for each Xenium dataset. The whole H&E image in each dataset was
horizontally sectioned into 5 non-overlapping portions, with each portion serving as the testing data
for a fold. The remaining portions formed the training and validation sets, where the validation set
was a section that was a tenth of the whole H&E in height. The training portion of a fold was
divided into non-overlapping 256 × 256 patches. During inference, patches were divided such that
there was a 30 pixel overlap (approximately the width of the largest nuclei in the data). The final
prediction for each distinct nucleus was based on the input image containing the largest area of
that particular nucleus.
For the HER2ST dataset, the SGE prediction was evaluated using 4-fold CV. The dataset was split
into four folds, with samples from the same patient belonging in the same fold. In each iteration of
the CV, two folds were used as a training set, one fold used as a validation set and the remaining
fold used as a test set. The best model within each fold was then chosen based on the epoch that
produced the best PCC in the validation set.
For GHIST, batch size was set to 8 during training and inference. The model is flexible regarding
the number of nuclei present in the patch, and outputs predicted gene expressions as
. The model was trained end-to-end from scratch for 50 epochs. The saved
𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠, 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙× 𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑠
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 19 =====
checkpoints (per epoch) were applied to the validation sets, and selection of the top performing
checkpoint was based on the best average of the rank in F1 score (of the auxiliary cell type
classification prediction component) and MSE (of the predicted single-cell expressions). The top
performing checkpoint was then applied to the test set of the fold.
Weights of the convolutional layers in GHIST were initialised using He et al.’s method55. Input
images were standardised using the mean and standard deviation of the training patches, and
gene expressions were log-normalised. We employed standard on-the-fly image data
augmentation by randomly applying a flip (horizontal or vertical), rotation (of 90, 180, or 270
degrees) in the (x,y) plane. The order of training samples was randomised prior to training. We
employed the AdamW optimiser56 to minimise the sum of all losses at a fixed learning rate of
0.001, with a first moment estimate of 0.9, second moment estimate of 0.999, and weight decay of
0.0001.
We ran GHIST on a Linux system with a 24GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, Intel(R)
Core(TM) i9-13900F CPU @ 5.60GHz with 32 threads, and 32GB RAM. GHIST was implemented
in Python using PyTorch.
Application to TCGA-BRCA
Disease-specific knowledge was incorporated during inference on the TCGA images, due to the
disparity between the sample that the model was trained on (which comprised normal ducts, ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and invasive carcinoma), and those of the TCGA cohort (all invasive
subtypes). Without fine-tuning, we set
to an arbitrary high value (10,000) and considering
as
α
𝑝𝐶𝑇
0 for malignant cell types (Equations 7 and 8). During inference on TCGA images, ensemble
averaging was carried out using the model checkpoints from three folds that were trained on
BreastCancer2.
Performance evaluation
Evaluation study 1: Ablation study
We performed an ablation study to determine the contributions from each of the types of biological
information in GHIST. We used BreastCancer2 for these experiments. We evaluated GHIST
without neighbourhood composition prediction, thereby impeding the ability to refine predicted
gene expressions for cells based on estimated neighbourhood characteristics. We also
investigated the effects of performing auxiliary cell type prediction, by removing the ability of the
model to leverage the relationships between gene expressions and cell type labels. Furthermore,
instead of performing a linear regression of average cell type profiles, we investigated the setting
where gene expressions are directly predicted as a straightforward regression.
We performed cell type classification using scClassify using the breast cancer reference data,
followed by comparison of cell type distribution and cell type proportion with the ground truth data
and the correlation of SVGs.
Evaluation study 2: Comparison study with other spot-based methods
We describe the settings for other spot-based methods below, and more details may be found in
our benchmarking work15:
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 20 =====
[A] Settings used for other methods
●
ST-Net10 - ST-Net was implemented in Python and PyTorch using hyperparameter values
as outlined in the original paper. The DenseNet-121 backbone used was pre-trained on
ImageNet. ST-Net was trained using the MSE loss function, computed between predicted
and ground truth expression levels.
●
HisToGene9 - The HisToGene model was implemented using PyTorch with the following
hyper-parameters: a learning rate of 10e-5, the number of training epochs of 100, a
drop-out ratio of 0.1, 8 Multi-Head Attention layers and 16 attention heads. The final model
used was the model after all epochs, as per the HisToGene pipeline.
●
GeneCodeR13 - GeneCodeR was the only method that did not use deep learning for its
model. The following hyperparameters were used for the coordinate descent updating
algorithm: the dimensions of the encoding space for the samples (i_dim) of k=500, the
dimensions of the encoding space for the features (j_dim) of c=500, initialisation for the
alpha_sample = “rnorm”, initialisation for the beta_sample = “irlba”, max iterations of 20,
tolerance of 5, learning rate of 0.1, and batch size of 500.
●
DeepSpaCE12 - The DeepSpaCE model was then implemented using the VGG16 model as
the backbone with the following hyperparameters: maximum number of training epochs of
50 (with training stopping before 50 if there is no improvement within 5 epochs), a learning
rate of 10e-4 and a weight decay of 10e-4.
●
DeepPT8 - DeepPT was implemented in Python and PyTorch using hyperparameter values
as outlined in the original paper. The ResNet-50 backbone used was pre-trained on
ImageNet. DeepPT was trained using the MSE loss function, computed between predicted
and ground truth expression levels.
●
Hist2ST11 - The model was implemented using Python and PyTorch and ran with default
parameters stated in the original paper. Some hyperparameter changes were made for
benchmarking including: increased the image patch size from 112x112 to 224x224 and
reduced the number of input and output channels in the depthwise and pointwise
convolutional blocks from 32 to 16 due to limited computational power. Image embedding
dimension was increased from 1024 to 2048 as the original code of setting embedding size
was hard coded based on the image patch size and the number of channels. The model
was trained using a sum of MSE loss of predicted and ground truth expression levels, ZINB
and Distillation mechanisms.
We used code from the official GitHub repositories for each method unless otherwise stated.
[B] Evaluation measures
Concordance between predicted and measured gene expression - We followed the strategies
described in our benchmarking work15 to assess the performance of GHIST on HER2ST data.
Briefly, the evaluation methods used include PCC and SSIM. These metrics were first calculated at
an image level (e.g. correlation was measured for each gene per image), and then averaged over
each patient, then averaged over each gene.
HVGs and SVGs were deduced from the ground truth SGE from the HER2ST dataset. The
modelGeneVar function, followed by the getTopHVGs function with prop=0.1 from the scran R
package57 version 1.32.0 were used to obtain the HVGs in each ST dataset. For SVGs selection,
genes with adjusted p<0.05 were identified as SVGs in each image sample in each dataset using
the SPARK-X package in R58 (version a8b4bf2). For HER2+, only the SVGs that appear in more
than 30 out of 36 samples were selected and correlation was calculated based on top 20 genes
ranked by adjusted p-value.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 21 =====
Assessment of the translational potential with cross-validated (CV) C-index and KM curves - We
first selected the top 20 genes associated with the highest C-indices from the univariate Cox
models built on the predicted SGEs for each gene. Next, a multivariate Cox regression was then
built using these genes. Each model was evaluated by C-index and a logrank p-value based on the
predicted SGE for each of the spot-based methods and GHIST, where C-index was calculated by
comparing the ground truth event times and events with model predictions for each patient within a
test set.
While many existing methods59 perform C-indices calculation similar to a resubstitution model, we
have used a three-fold CV with 100 repeats. This meant that patients were randomly split into three
subsets. Each subset was used as a test set of patients while the rest of the patients were used to
train models. Through repeating this process 100 times, we measured the C-indices for each test
set to obtain an average C-index across 300 values. We also obtained the average prediction for
each patient over all repetitions under CV which was then used to categorise patients into high and
low-risk. KM curves were then constructed for each of the high-risk and low-risk groups. The
log-rank test was then used to obtain a p-value to quantify the difference between survival of the
two groups.
Evaluation study 3: Performance evaluation at single cell resolution
Visual assessment - We selected cell type specific marker genes using the Findmarker function in
Seurat to identify markers for each cell type. We visualised the predicted gene expression and the
measured gene expression of the selected top marker genes.
Concordance between predicted and measured cell types proportion - We predicted the cell types
in the TCGA data using the single-cell breast reference as aforementioned. We then visually
compared the cell types between predicted and measured using barplots and scatterplots.
Correlation between predicted and measured gene expression - We treated the measured gene
expression from the SST data as the ground truth. We computed the Pearson correlation
coefficient (PCC) of a collection of genes between the predicted gene expression from H&E and
the measured (ground truth) gene expression from SST. We calculated the PCC based on (1) top
20 SVGs, (2) top 50 SVGs, (3) top 20 HVGs, (4) top 50 HVGs, (5) top 20 non-SVGs, (6) top 50
non-SVGs, (7) top 20 non-HVGs and (8) top 50 non-HVGs. We defined the top SVGs and HVGs
using the default ordering of the genes from the SVGs and HVGs calculation. The non-SVGs and
non-HVGs are defined as the genes ranked in the bottom of the SVGs and HVGs calculation. For
example, bottom 20 non-HVGs are defined to be the genes ranked in the bottom 20 of the HVGs
calculation.
The SVGs were calculated using Giotto rank60 version 1.1.2, one of the top performing methods
based on a recent benchmarking paper61. The HVGs were calculated based on the function
FindVariableFeatures from the Seurat R package62 version 5.0.3.
Assessment of the translational potential of spatial features - We examined whether the prediction
expression contains information that can be used to stratify patients into distinct survival groups.
We used death as the survival event outcome, days to death as the survival times, and days to last
follow up when there was no death event. We considered each of the feature types as described in
the Multi-view feature generation section and Supplementary Table 4 and examined the
discriminatory power of each feature type by estimating the high-risk and low-risk individuals based
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 22 =====
on a given set of features.
For a given feature type, we selected the top 1% of the features, or the top 5 features, whichever
number is greater, from each feature type separately (Supplementary Table 4) and used them to
fit a Cox Proportional Hazard (CoxPH) model (function crossValidate in the ClassifyR63 R package
version 3.9.1). Next, for each of the feature types described in Supplementary Table 4, we used
5,000 repeated three-fold cross-validation strategies to identify high-risk and low-risk individuals. In
each iteration (one repeat), two folds of the patients were used to train the CoxPH model based on
the selected features and individual risk was calculated on the remaining testing fold. This was
repeated 5,000 times, resulting in a vector of a “risk score” for each patient. For each patient, this
resulted in a vector of 5,000 risks estimated when the individual was inside the “test set” for each
iteration. The final risk score was calculated as the median of this vector of risk estimates.
Using the final risk score, patients with a risk in the 0 to 25% quantile are defined as the "low risk
group," while individuals in the 75% to 100% quantile are defined as the "high risk group." A
Kaplan-Meier (KM) plot was then constructed, and a log-rank test was performed. The chi-square
statistic and p-value associated with the log-rank test were calculated to measure the difference in
survival between the two groups. We used the chi-square statistics associated with each feature
type to assess the discrimination capacity of each feature type. To ensure a fair comparison with
TCGA, we first subset the TCGA bulk RNA-seq to the same set of genes as in the H&E gene
panel.
Downstream statistical and computational biology analysis
To examine the downstream application of GHIST, we applied GHIST trained on the dataset
BreastCancer2 to predict the expression on 92 TCGA patients (detailed in previous sections).
Multi-view feature generation
We generated multiple types of features based on the prediction gene expression to enable more
comprehensive exploration of the TCGA patients. Using the R package scFeatures25 version 1.4.0,
we generated a total of eight feature types from three distinct categories: single-cell based cell type
proportion, single-cell based cell type-specific expression, and spatial pattern. Each feature type
contained tens to hundreds of features. Supplementary Table 4 describes each feature type in
detail.
Differential state analysis between conditions (ER-/PR- vs ER+/PR+)
While we now have a computationally generated multi-sample, multi-group spatially resolved
scRNA-seq TCGA-BRAC data, we first focused on identifying markers for differential cell states for
each cell type between individuals with oestrogen receptor negative (ER-)/progesterone receptor
negative (PR-) vs. oestrogen receptor positive (ER+)/progesterone receptor positive (PR+). We
modelled this using a negative binomial generalised linear model implemented in the function
pbDS in the R package muscat (version 1.18.0). Significant differential cell state markers were
defined as genes with log fold change > 1 and p-value < 0.05. We visualised the expression of
these cell type specific differential state genes as a heatmap.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 23 =====
Unsupervised learning to detect novel sub-cohort in ER+/PR+
Within the ER+/PR+ cohort, we performed k-means clustering based on all cell type specific
differential state genes identified in the previous section to cluster into two groups. We used PCC
as the similarity metric and used the default parameters for the rest. This was performed using the
Heatmap function implemented in the ComplexHeatmap64 R package version 2.20.0.
The characteristics of the two resulting clusters were determined in three different ways:
(a) Survival analysis - We calculated the KM curve for survival for cluster 1 and cluster 2 using
the function survfit in R package survival version 3.6-4.
(b) DE analysis - We generated a large collection of features for each individual in the TCGA
data using scFeatures (see Multiview feature generation section). Next, we identified
features with a differential based on a moderated t-test using the lmFit function
implemented in the package limma (version 3.60.2). We visualised these results using
volcano plots.
(c) Classification analysis - We further performed classification to examine the separability of
the two subgroups based on various feature types. To avoid the potential issue of “double
dipping”, we removed all differential state genes from the features in each feature type, as
well as genes with a correlation above 0.7 with any of the differential state genes. We
assessed the performance based on balanced accuracy using 100 repeated three-fold
cross-validation implemented in the crossValidate function in the R package ClassifyR. The
crossValidate has an in-built feature selection using t-tests to select features with
differential “measurement” between cluster 1 and cluster 2. We used a support vector
machine (SVM) as the classification model backbone. For visualisation of most important
features contributing to the classification, we selected top features based on frequency of
inclusion, and visualised the values of these features in cluster 1 and cluster 2 samples
using boxplots.
Trans-acting associations between copy number aberration and nearest neighbourhood
correlation
Focal copy number alteration (CNA) was estimated using the Genomic Data Common (GDC)
pipeline with the GISTIC method implemented and then thresholded to -1, 0, 1, representing
deletion, normal copy, or amplification. Here we selected 91 TCGA HER2+ patients that had copy
number alteration results to perform downstream analysis, as one patient (TCGA-AR-A1AT) did not
have CNA data. CNAs on chromosome X were removed. We first selected all genes that have both
deletion and amplification with a frequency >= 5, which resulted in 2,177 CNA genes. Next, for a
given CNA_gene, we compared between two groups of individuals, patients showing CNA_gene
loss (-1) and CNA_gene gain (+1). For these two groups, we identified differential patterning (DP)
genes where spatial patterning was measured by NN correlation. This DP analysis was repeated
for all 2,177 CNA_genes a matrix of p-values representing the moderated t-tests for 2,177 gene
CNAs being tested against 280 genes’ NN correlation (Supplementary Table 2). Due to the
correlation between genes in the same genomic region, we did Bonferroni correction for 800
unique genes among the 2,177 genes. Genes with p-value < 1.25
(1/800) were considered
× 10
−3
as DP genes, representing genes that significantly affect spatial expression patterns for a given
CNA_gene. The number of DP genes are tabulated for each CNA gene and CNA clusters are
identified as DP hotspots. Three hotspots regions were selected for highlighting differential NN
correlation between gain and loss copy number by calculating -log2(fold change).
Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 24 =====
Data availability
All datasets used in this study are publicly available and were downloaded from the following links.
10x Genomics Xenium breast cancer samples 1 and 2, and single-cell data:
https://www.10xgenomics.com/products/xenium-in-situ/preview-dataset-human-breast. 10x
Genomics Xenium lung adenocarcinoma:
https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/preview-data-ffpe-human-lung-cancer-with-xenium-multim
odal-cell-segmentation-1-standard. 10x Genomics Xenium melanoma:
https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets/human-skin-preview-data-xenium-human-skin-gene-expre
ssion-panel-add-on-1-standard. Melanoma single-cell reference data was downloaded from dbGaP
under accession code phs001861.v1.p1
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs001861.v1.p1). Lung atlas
data from CZI CELLXGENE data portal:
https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/6f6d381a-7701-4781-935c-db10d30de293. HER2ST
dataset: https://github.com/almaan/her2st. NuCLS dataset:
https://github.com/PathologyDataScience/BCSS. TCGA-BRCA:
https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects/TCGA-BRCA. TCGA-BRCA clinical data:
https://www.cbioportal.org/study/clinicalData?id=brca_tcga. Somatic copy number alteration for
study name GDC TCGA Breast Cancer (BRCA) was downloaded from UCSC Xena
https://xena.ucsc.edu/.
Code availability
We provide our code for GHIST in https://github.com/SydneyBioX/GHIST.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank all their colleagues, particularly at The University of Sydney, Sydney Precision
Data Science and Charles Perkins Centre for their support and intellectual engagement. Special
thanks to Matthew Shu, Agus Salim, and Hao Wang and for their contribution to discussions, and
to Nick Robertson for testing the GHIST code.
Funding
This work is supported by Judith and David Coffey Life Lab (CPC) to YC and JY; the AIR@innoHK
programme of the Innovation and Technology Commission of Hong Kong to JY, JK, EP, YC, XF;
NHMRC Investigator Grant APP2017023 to JY and CW; Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Single Cell
Biology Data Insights grant (DI2-0000000197) to YC and JY; ARC Discovery Project
DP200103748 to JK, and the USyd–UofG Ignition Grant to JK, JY, and XF.
The funding source had no role in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of
data, in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
Author contribution
JY conceived and led the study with design input from XF. XF led the method development and
implementation of the framework, with input from YC, JK and JY. YC and XF co-led the data
assessment with input from JY, NP, DG, and EP. YC led downstream analysis with input from JY,
XF, EP, DG and BB. BB led the multi-omics analysis with input from YC, XF, JY, DG and EP. CW
led the spot-based evaluation. NP assessed the QC of all H&E slides and with DG, guided the
refinement of the model and interpretation. All authors contributed to the writing, editing, and
approval of the manuscript.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 25 =====
References
1.
Ståhl, P. L. et al. Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections by spatial
transcriptomics. Science 353, 78–82 (2016).
2.
Chen, W.-T. et al. Spatial Transcriptomics and In Situ Sequencing to Study Alzheimer’s
Disease. Cell 182, 976–991.e19 (2020).
3.
Baccin, C. et al. Combined single-cell and spatial transcriptomics reveal the molecular, cellular
and spatial bone marrow niche organization. Nat. Cell Biol. 22, 38–48 (2019).
4.
Walker, B. L., Cang, Z., Ren, H., Bourgain-Chang, E. & Nie, Q. Deciphering tissue structure
and function using spatial transcriptomics. Communications Biology 5, 1–10 (2022).
5.
Janesick, A. et al. High resolution mapping of the breast cancer tumor microenvironment using
integrated single cell, spatial and in situ analysis of FFPE tissue. bioRxiv 2022.10.06.510405
(2022) doi:10.1101/2022.10.06.510405.
6.
He, S. et al. High-plex Multiomic Analysis in FFPE at Subcellular Level by Spatial Molecular
Imaging. bioRxiv 2021.11.03.467020 (2022) doi:10.1101/2021.11.03.467020.
7.
Fischer, A. H., Jacobson, K. A., Rose, J. & Zeller, R. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of tissue
and cell sections. CSH Protoc. 2008, db.prot4986 (2008).
8.
Hoang, D.-T. et al. Prediction of cancer treatment response from histopathology images
through imputed transcriptomics. Res Sq (2023) doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-3193270/v1.
9.
Pang, M., Su, K. & Li, M. Leveraging information in spatial transcriptomics to predict
super-resolution gene expression from histology images in tumors. bioRxiv (2021)
doi:10.1101/2021.11.28.470212.
10. He, B. et al. Integrating spatial gene expression and breast tumour morphology via deep
learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering 4, 827–834 (2020).
11. Zeng, Y. et al. Spatial transcriptomics prediction from histology jointly through Transformer and
graph neural networks. Brief. Bioinform. 23, (2022).
12. Monjo, T., Koido, M., Nagasawa, S., Suzuki, Y. & Kamatani, Y. Efficient prediction of a spatial
transcriptomics profile better characterizes breast cancer tissue sections without costly
experimentation. Sci. Rep. 12, 1–12 (2022).
13. Banh, D. & Huang, A. Scalable parametric encoding of multiple modalities. bioRxiv
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 26 =====
2021.07.09.451779 (2022) doi:10.1101/2021.07.09.451779.
14. Zhang, D. et al. Inferring super-resolution tissue architecture by integrating spatial
transcriptomics with histology. Nat. Biotechnol. 1–6 (2024).
15. Chan, A. S. et al. Benchmarking the translational potential of spatial gene expression
prediction from histology. bioRxiv 2023.12.12.571251 (2023) doi:10.1101/2023.12.12.571251.
16. Wan, X. et al. Integrating spatial and single-cell transcriptomics data using deep generative
models with SpatialScope. Nat. Commun. 14, 1–22 (2023).
17. Zhao, C. et al. Innovative super-resolution in spatial transcriptomics: a transformer model
exploiting histology images and spatial gene expression. Brief. Bioinform. 25, bbae052 (2024).
18. Hu, J. et al. SpaGCN: Integrating gene expression, spatial location and histology to identify
spatial domains and spatially variable genes by graph convolutional network. Nat. Methods 18,
1342–1351 (2021).
19. Sen, U., Coleman, C. & Sen, T. Stearoyl coenzyme A desaturase-1: multitasker in cancer,
metabolism, and ferroptosis. Trends Cancer Res. 9, 480–489 (2023).
20. Xu, S. et al. Fatty acid synthase promotes breast cancer metastasis by mediating changes in
fatty acid metabolism. Oncol. Lett. 21, 27 (2021).
21. Seachrist, D. D., Anstine, L. J. & Keri, R. A. FOXA1: A Pioneer of Nuclear Receptor Action in
Breast Cancer. Cancers 13, (2021).
22. Osta, W. A. et al. EpCAM is overexpressed in breast cancer and is a potential target for breast
cancer gene therapy. Cancer Res. 64, 5818–5824 (2004).
23. Andersson, A. et al. Spatial deconvolution of HER2-positive breast cancer delineates
tumor-associated cell type interactions. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–14 (2021).
24. Dunnwald, L. K., Rossing, M. A. & Li, C. I. Hormone receptor status, tumor characteristics, and
prognosis: a prospective cohort of breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res. 9, R6 (2007).
25. Cao, Y., Lin, Y., Patrick, E., Yang, P. & Yang, J. Y. H. scFeatures: multi-view representations of
single-cell and spatial data for disease outcome prediction. Bioinformatics 38, 4745–4753
(2022).
26. Curtis, C. et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals
novel subgroups. Nature 486, 346–352 (2012).
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 27 =====
27. Pereira, B. et al. The somatic mutation profiles of 2,433 breast cancers refine their genomic
and transcriptomic landscapes. Nat. Commun. 7, 1–16 (2016).
28. Kiemeney, L. A. et al. Sequence variant on 8q24 confers susceptibility to urinary bladder
cancer. Nat. Genet. 40, 1307–1312 (2008).
29. Haiman, C. A. et al. Multiple regions within 8q24 independently affect risk for prostate cancer.
Nat. Genet. 39, 638–644 (2007).
30. Easton, D. F. et al. Genome-wide association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility
loci. Nature 447, 1087 (2007).
31. Zanke, B. W. et al. Genome-wide association scan identifies a colorectal cancer susceptibility
locus on chromosome 8q24. Nat. Genet. 39, 989–994 (2007).
32. Uusküla-Reimand, L. & Wilson, M. D. Untangling the roles of TOP2A and TOP2B in
transcription and cancer. Sci. Adv. 8, eadd4920 (2022).
33. Nielsen, K. V. et al. The value of TOP2A gene copy number variation as a biomarker in breast
cancer: Update of DBCG trial 89D. Acta Oncol. 47, 725–734 (2008).
34. Di Leo, A. et al. HER2 and TOP2A as predictive markers for anthracycline-containing
chemotherapy regimens as adjuvant treatment of breast cancer: a meta-analysis of individual
patient data. Lancet Oncol. 12, 1134–1142 (2011).
35. Hassan, T., Li, Z., Javed, S., Dias, J. & Werghi, N. Neural Graph Refinement for Robust
Recognition of Nuclei Communities in Histopathological Landscape. IEEE Trans. Image
Process. 33, 241–256 (2024).
36. Hassan, T. et al. Nucleus classification in histology images using message passing network.
Med. Image Anal. 79, 102480 (2022).
37. Graham, S. et al. Hover-Net: Simultaneous segmentation and classification of nuclei in
multi-tissue histology images. Med. Image Anal. 58, 101563 (2019).
38. Amgad, M. et al. Structured crowdsourcing enables convolutional segmentation of histology
images. Bioinformatics 35, 3461–3467 (2019).
39. Missarova, A. et al. geneBasis: an iterative approach for unsupervised selection of targeted
gene panels from scRNA-seq. Genome Biol. 22, 1–22 (2021).
40. Zhang, Y. et al. Gene panel selection for targeted spatial transcriptomics. Genome Biol. 25, 35
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 28 =====
(2024).
41. Imaging and Technology in Urology. (Springer International Publishing).
42. Fu, X. et al. BIDCell: Biologically-informed self-supervised learning for segmentation of
subcellular spatial transcriptomics data. Nat. Commun. 15, 509 (2024).
43. Janesick, A. et al. High resolution mapping of the tumor microenvironment using integrated
single-cell, spatial and in situ analysis. Nat. Commun. 14, 1–15 (2023).
44. Lin, Y. et al. scClassify: sample size estimation and multiscale classification of cells using
single and multiple reference. Mol. Syst. Biol. 16, e9389 (2020).
45. Durante, M. A. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals new evolutionary complexity in uveal
melanoma. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–10 (2020).
46. Amgad, M. et al. NuCLS: A scalable crowdsourcing approach and dataset for nucleus
classification and segmentation in breast cancer. Gigascience 11, (2022).
47. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours.
Nature 490, 61–70 (2012).
48. Colaprico, A. et al. TCGAbiolinks: an R/Bioconductor package for integrative analysis of TCGA
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e71 (2016).
49. Fertig, E. J., Lee, E., Pandey, N. B. & Popel, A. S. Analysis of gene expression of secreted
factors associated with breast cancer metastases in breast cancer subtypes. Sci. Rep. 5,
12133 (2015).
50. Barbano, C. A. et al. Unitopatho, A Labeled Histopathological Dataset for Colorectal Polyps
Classification and Adenoma Dysplasia Grading. in 2021 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP) 76–80 (IEEE, 2021).
51. Macenko, M. et al. A method for normalizing histology slides for quantitative analysis. in 2009
IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro 1107–1110
(IEEE, 2009).
52. Huang, H. et al. UNet 3+: A Full-Scale Connected UNet for Medical Image Segmentation. in
ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) 1055–1059 (IEEE, 2020).
53. Jackson, H. W. et al. The single-cell pathology landscape of breast cancer. Nature 578,
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 29 =====
615–620 (2020).
54. Ji, A. L. et al. Multimodal Analysis of Composition and Spatial Architecture in Human
Squamous Cell Carcinoma. Cell 182, 497–514.e22 (2020).
55. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level
Performance on ImageNet Classification. in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV) 1026–1034 (IEEE, 2015).
56. Loshchilov, I. & Hutter, F. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. https://openreview.net ›
forumhttps://openreview.net › forum (2018).
57. R. Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. MSOR connections 1,
(2014).
58. Zhu, J., Sun, S. & Zhou, X. SPARK-X: non-parametric modeling enables scalable and robust
detection of spatial expression patterns for large spatial transcriptomic studies. Genome Biol.
22, 184 (2021).
59. Xu, J. et al. Delving into the Heterogeneity of Different Breast Cancer Subtypes and the
Prognostic Models Utilizing scRNA-Seq and Bulk RNA-Seq. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23, (2022).
60. Dries, R. et al. Giotto: a toolbox for integrative analysis and visualization of spatial expression
data. Genome Biol. 22, 78 (2021).
61. Chen, C., Kim, H. J. & Yang, P. Evaluating spatially variable gene detection methods for
spatial transcriptomics data. Genome Biol. 25, 18 (2024).
62. Hao, Y. et al. Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable single-cell analysis.
Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 293–304 (2023).
63. Strbenac, D., Mann, G. J., Ormerod, J. T. & Yang, J. Y. H. ClassifyR: an R package for
performance assessment of classification with applications to transcriptomics. Bioinformatics
31, 1851–1853 (2015).
64. Gu, Z. Complex heatmap visualization. Imeta 1, e43 (2022).
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 30 =====
Figures
Figure 1 GHIST framework.
GHIST maps H&E images to spatially resolved single-cell gene expressions through leveraging
paired SST data during training. The multitask DL-based model integrates relationships between
multiple levels of information related to gene expressions within cells. Once trained, GHIST
enables the in silico estimation of spatially resolved single-cell gene expressions from existing H&E
data alone, that can be used to enrich further downstream analysis. The cell segmentation and cell
type classification preprocessing steps are performed during training only. During inference, stain
normalisation is applied on query H&E slides, and single-cell reference information is not required
as an input if it was not used during training.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 31 =====
Figure 2 GHIST predictions on two breast cancer H&E images.
Comparison between cell types (a) and cell type compositions (b) obtained from BreastCancer1
paired SST (Xenium) data and predicted cell types from expressions predicted from H&E.
Comparison between cell types (c) and cell type compositions (d) obtained from BreastCancer2
paired SST (Xenium) data and predicted cell types from expressions predicted from H&E. (e)
Predicted gene expression in individual cells from GHIST and SST data (for the gene SCD) on
BreastCancer1. (f) Boxplot of computed PCC between predicted and measured (ground truth)
expressions for top 20 and 50 predicted SVGs and non-SVGs in both BreastCancer1 and
BreastCancer2. (g) Scatter plots showing the predicted SGE expressions of SCD, FASN, FOXA1,
and EPCAM compared to measured SST expressions.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 32 =====
Figure 3 Comparison of spot-based gene prediction and survival analysis performance
among state-of-the-art methods and GHIST using the HER2ST dataset.
(a) Violin and boxplots of the average PCC and (b) SSIM between ground truth gene expression
and predicted gene expression. Metrics measured from the test fold of a 4-fold CV, averaged over
each gene across the dataset. (c) Top five correlated genes. (d) PCC and (e) SSIM violin and
boxplots for each method for selected SVGs. (f) C-indices of multivariate cox regression models
predicting survival of HER2+ subtype from TCGA-BRCA patients, using RNA-Seq bulk, RNA-Seq
bulk using only genes present in HER2ST dataset, and the predicted pseudobulk from each
method. C-indices were calculated from the test sets of a 3-fold CV with 100 repeats. (g)
Cross-validated KM curves for patients split into high and low risk groups by the median risk
prediction of the multivariate cox regression models for each method and HER2+ breast cancer
subtypes. Each violin and boxplot in this figure ranges from the first to third quartile with the
median as the vertical line. The lower whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the
first quartile, while the upper whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third
quartile.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 33 =====
Figure 4 Application of GHIST to TCGA breast cancer H&E images.
(a) Illustration of the total predicted gene expressions for each cell for a given H&E image taken
from two TCGA-BRCA samples. (b) Cell type classifications using the predicted expressions,
UMAP of the cell type compositions, and illustrations of the predicted expressions of DSP and
SFRP4 within cells in the two samples. (c) Predicted cell type proportions for the selected TCGA
HER2+ patients.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 34 =====
Figure 5 Potential of GHIST to create an in silico modality for multi-view analysis.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 35 =====
(a) Cross-validated KM curves for patients split into high and low risk groups by the median risk
predictions from cell type proportion, cell type specific predicted gene expression, L statistics of cell
types, and RNA-seq data downloaded from TCGA. (b) Cell type specific differential state genes in
macrophage and stromal cells between ER+/PR+ and ER-/PR- patients. (c) The ER+/PR+ group
exhibited heterogeneity in expression of LPL, CAVIN2, TIMP4, GZMK, and ADIPOQ. Clustering
method grouped them into two clusters. (d) Discrimination power of various feature types related to
cell type proportion, cell type specific expression and spatial features between the two clusters.
Each boxplot ranges from the first to third quartile with the median as the horizontal line. The lower
whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile, while the upper whisker
extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third quartile. (e) Differential spatial gene
expression affected by copy number alteration. Volcano plots display 3 selected hotspots (1, 8,
17q) that affect a number of spatial expression patterns of genes (top). The number of differential
patterning genes that were affected by each CNA (middle). Averaged copy number alteration
profiles of 2,177 genes tested in the 91 patients are displayed (bottom).
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 36 =====
Supplementary Figures
Supplementary Figure 1 Ablation study.
Performance of GHIST with and without key components (auxiliary cell type prediction,
neighbourhood composition, and input single-cell reference data) on BreastCancer2. “w/o” stands
for without the component, “+” represents with the components, “ref” stands for input single-cell
reference data, “celltype” stands for auxiliary cell type prediction, “neighbourhood” stands for
neighbourhood composition. (a) Cell types from scClassify using predicted single-cell expressions
from the various settings mapped spatially across the slide. (b) Number of cells in each predicted
cell type. B and myeloid cells were missing in predictions without auxiliary cell type or
neighbourhood composition prediction. (c) Predicted cell type proportion. (d) PCC of predicted
SVGs. PCC of the top 20 and top 50 SVGs were markedly lower in the base model without using
single-cell reference data as input. Each boxplot ranges from the first to third quartile with the
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 37 =====
median as the horizontal line. The lower whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below
the first quartile, while the upper whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third
quartile.
Supplementary Figure 2 Additional markers of different cell types.
Expression of predicted cell type markers (CD4 for macrophages, MYLK for epithelial cells,
SEC11C for stromal cells, and MMP2 for T cells) mapped across the BreastCancer1 and
BreastCancer2 slides.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 38 =====
Supplementary Figure 3 PCC of predicted HVGs in the two breast cancer Xenium samples.
(a) Boxplots of the PCC for the top 20 and 50 genes between the ground truth and predicted
expressions. Each boxplot ranges from the first to third quartile with the median as the horizontal
line. The lower whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile, while the
upper whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third quartile. (b) Scatter plot
between the ground truth and predicted expressions for selected HVGs (IL7R, CD3E, LUM,
ABCC11, SCD, and SERPINA3) in BreastCancer1.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 39 =====
Supplementary Figure 4 LungAdenocarcinoma results.
(a) Cell types including blood vessels, epithelium, fibroblast lineage, lymphatic EC, lymphoid,
myeloid, smooth muscle, and unassigned cells are mapped spatially across the tissue slide for the
measured (ground truth) and predicted expressions. (b) Scatter plot between the measured
(ground truth) and predicted cell type proportions.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 40 =====
Supplementary Figure 5 Melanoma results.
(a) Cell types including B, dendritic, endothelial, fibroblasts, macrophages, NK, photoreceptor,
plasma, RPE, T, tumour, and unassigned cells. These are mapped spatially across the tissue slide
for the measured (ground truth) and predicted expressions. (b) Scatter plot between the measured
(ground truth) and predicted cell type proportions.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 41 =====
Supplementary Figure 6 Spot-based gene prediction and survival analysis performance
among state-of-the-art methods and GHIST using the HER2ST dataset.
PCC and SSIM violin plots for each method for all genes as well as for selected HVGs and SVGs,
demonstrating that selecting such types of genes is more biologically meaningful for comparison
than all genes. Each plot ranges from the first to third quartile with the median as the horizontal
line. The lower whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile, while the
upper whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third quartile.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 42 =====
Supplementary Figure 7 Predicted expression of selected genes in different cell types.
Box plots showing the mean predicted expression of DSP and SFRP4 across cells of different cell
types in the TCGA patients. Each boxplot ranges from the first to third quartile with the median as
the horizontal line. The lower whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first
quartile, while the upper whisker extends 1.5 times the interquartile range above the third quartile.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 43 =====
Supplementary Figure 8 Stain quality issues in TCGA-BRCA.
Examples of issues with stain quality observed in the H&E images from TCGA-BRCA patients,
where (a) TCGA-AO-A12G appeared understained and faded, and (b) TCGA-PE-A5DD appeared
very overstained.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 44 =====
Supplementary Figure 9 KM curves for the TCGA breast cancer HER2+ subset using
various features types from scFeatures.
Proportion_ratio represents the ratio between pairwise cell type proportions, gene_cor_celltype
represents the correlation between pairwise gene expression, celltype_interaction represents the
cell type composition of neighbouring cell types, morans_I represents the Moran’s I spatial
autocorrelation metric, nn_correlation represents correlation of gene expression between
neighbouring cells.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 45 =====
Supplementary Figure 10 Volcano plots between Cluster 1 and Cluster 2 split by different
cell types.
Volcano plot showing significant differentially expressed genes between the cluster 1 and cluster 2
refined ER+/PR+ patients.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 46 =====
Supplementary Figure 11 KM curves of original patient label and refined patient label.
(a) The KM curve based on the original ER+/PR+ and ER-/PR- patient group as defined in TCGA
[left], and the KM curve based on refined patient clusters within the ER+PR+ patients [right]. (b),
the top 5 features with greatest feature importance in the cluster 1 and cluster 2 classification
model based on the cell-type-specific gene mean expression feature type [left], and the top 5
features in the model based on the nearest neighbour correlation feature type [right]. Each boxplot
ranges from the first to third quartile with the median as the horizontal line. The lower whisker
extends 1.5 times the interquartile range below the first quartile, while the upper whisker extends
1.5 times the interquartile range above the third quartile.
.
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license
made available under a 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted July 4, 2024. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.02.601790
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 
