
===== PAGE 1 =====
A Foundational Multimodal Vision Language AI Assistant for
Human Pathology
Ming Y. Lu1,2,3,4,6‡, Bowen Chen1,2‡, Drew F. K. Williamson1,2,3‡, Richard J. Chen1,2,3,4,5, Kenji Ikamura1,2,
Georg Gerber1, Ivy Liang1,7, Long Phi Le2, Tong Ding1, Anil V Parwani8, Faisal Mahmood∗1,2,3,4,9
1Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
2Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
3Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA
4Cancer Data Science Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
5Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
6Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA
7Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering And Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
8Department of Pathology, Wexner Medical Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
9Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
‡ Contributed Equally
*Corresponding author: Faisal Mahmood (faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu)
Abstract
The field of computational pathology has witnessed remarkable progress in the development of both task-
specific predictive models and task-agnostic self-supervised vision encoders. However, despite the explosive
growth of generative artificial intelligence (AI), there has been limited study on building general purpose, mul-
timodal AI assistants tailored to pathology. Here we present PathChat, a vision-language generalist AI assistant
for human pathology using an in-house developed foundational vision encoder pretrained on 100 million his-
tology images from over 100,000 patient cases and 1.18 million pathology image-caption pairs. The vision
encoder is then combined with a pretrained large language model and the whole system is finetuned on over
250,000 diverse disease agnostic visual language instructions. We compare PathChat against several multi-
modal vision language AI assistants as well as GPT4V, which powers the commercially available multimodal
general purpose AI assistant ChatGPT-4. When relevant clinical context is provided with the histology im-
age, PathChat achieved a diagnostic accuracy of 87% on multiple-choice questions based on publicly available
cases of diverse tissue origins and disease models. Additionally, using open-ended questions and human ex-
pert evaluation, we found that overall PathChat produced more accurate and pathologist-preferable responses
to diverse queries related to pathology. As an interactive and general vision language AI assistant that can
flexibly handle both visual and natural language inputs, PathChat can potentially find impactful applications in
pathology education, research, and human-in-the-loop clinical decision making.
Video demo: Dropbox link, Google Drive link
1
arXiv:2312.07814v1  [cs.CV]  13 Dec 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
Introduction
The field of computational pathology has witnessed a remarkable transformation in recent years, pro-
pelled by the convergence of several key trends including increased availability and institutional adoption of
digital slide scanning, rapid progress in artificial intelligence (AI) research, increasing accessibility of large
datasets, and substantial high-performance computing resources1–9.
With varying degrees of success, re-
searchers have leveraged deep learning to address a diverse range of tasks, including cancer subtyping10,11
and grading12,13, metastasis detection14–16, survival 17–24 and response-to-treatment prediction25–27, tumor site
of origin prediction28,29, image search30–33, mutation prediction and biomarker screening34–37, and more38–42.
At the same time, general purpose vision encoder models43–48, which are trained on vast datasets of unlabeled
histopathology images and can serve as versatile task-agnostic model backbones49–56, are paving the way for
further improvements across many tasks in computational pathology, both in performance and label efficiency.
However, the aforementioned developments in computational pathology do not yet reflect the important
roles of natural language in pathology, as a key to unlocking rich, diverse sources of accumulated human med-
ical knowledge, as a potential signal for model supervision, and as a unified medium for facilitating intuitive
interaction between powerful AI models and end users. Notably, in general machine learning, representative
works demonstrated that large-scale vision language representation learning can augment vision-only AI mod-
els with new capabilities including zero-shot image recognition57,58 and text-to-image retrieval59–61. Depending
on the architectural design and training data and objectives, visual language pretrained systems62–69 can also
often be finetuned for tailored tasks ranging from visual question answering and image captioning to object
detection and semantic segmentation. In medical imaging and computational pathology, researchers have re-
cently begun to harness diverse sources70–77 of paired biomedical images and captions or reports for visual
language pretraining75,78, including the development of CLIP57-like models tailored for specific domains such
as pathology74,77,79,80 and radiology72,81–84. In computational pathology, a few works have shown promising
zero-shot performance in select diagnostic and retrieval tasks74,77,79, while other works also experimented with
designing specialized models for biomedical visual question answering or captioning85–89. However, these
models are not yet ready to serve as interactive assistants for pathologists, researchers using pathology image
data, or pathology trainees. This is because those models such as CLIP which have been trained using pathol-
ogy data are not also trained to understand and follow diverse and often complex instructions of users and have
limited to no ability to generate coherent responses in natural language grounded in factual knowledge.
Following the rise of large language models90–103 (LLMs), rapid advances in multimodal large language
models104–106 (MLLMs) and the broader field of generative AI107 are poised to open a new frontier for com-
putational pathology, one which emphasizes natural language and human interaction as key components of
AI model design and user experience, in addition to powerful visual processing capabilities. General pur-
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
pose multimodal generative AI products, notably ChatGPT-4, are maturing, and have demonstrated impres-
sive capabilities on a wide range of routine, creative, as well as professional use cases108, including coding,
writing, summarization, data analysis, question answering, translation, and even image generation, all while
being accessible through an intuitive and interactive user interface. While there have been attempts to inves-
tigate their performance on answering medicine-related queries109–116, their capability to assist professionals
and researchers in the highly specialized but important sub-field of anatomic pathology remains relatively
unexplored111,117–120. However, the potential applications of an interactive, multimodal AI assistant for pathol-
ogy are immense. The ability to understand and respond to complex queries in natural language in theory could
enable such an assistant to serve as a helpful companion across various stages of human-in-the-loop clinical
decision making, education, and research. For instance, in the clinic, the AI assistant might be able to ingest
a histopathology image, provide an initial assessment of the morphological appearance, and identify potential
features of malignancy. Subsequently, the pathologist or trainee could provide additional context about the
underlying case, such as clinical parameters of the patient and the tissue site, and ask the model to suggest
a differential diagnosis. If deemed reasonable, the user could then request helpful suggestions for ancillary
testing and immunohistochemical stains to narrow down the differential. Finally, the results of such tests could
also be provided to the model to make a final deduction to arrive at the diagnosis. In research, a multimodal
AI model that can summarize the morphological features of large cohorts of histopathology images would po-
tentially enable automated quantification and interpretation of morphological markers in large data cohorts. In
medical education, an accurate, on-demand interactive AI companion could help democratize access to expert-
level guidance and training in pathology, thereby narrowing the gap between regional disparities in healthcare
provision.
Vision language AI assistant for human pathology
In this article, we develop a vision language interactive AI assistant for human pathology powered by a custom,
finetuned multimodal large language model (MLLM). To build an MLLM-based vision language AI assistant
that can reason over both visual and natural language inputs, we begin with UNI49, a state-of-the-art (SOTA)
vision-only foundational encoder model pretrained on over 100 million histology images from over 100 thou-
sand slides using self-supervised learning. We perform further vision language pretraining on the UNI encoder
with 1.18 million pathology image caption pairs to align its image representation space with that of pathology
text79. The resulting vision encoder, CONCH-Large, is subsequently connected to a 13 billion parameter, pre-
trained LLM98 via the multimodal projector module to form the complete MLLM architecture. The MLLM is
finally finetuned via a curated dataset of over 250 thousand instructions to build PathChat (Figure 1), a visual
language AI assistant that can understand pathology images and text and respond to complex pathology-related
queries. More details about data curation and model training can be found in PathChat dataset curation and
PathChat model design and training section of Methods respectively.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Figure 1: Instruction-following dataset curation and PathChat overview. a. We curated the currently
largest instruction finetuning dataset specialized for the domain of pathology, consisting of 257k instructions
and corresponding responses covering varied formats (e.g. multi-turn conversations, multiple-choice questions,
short answers; see Extended Data Figure 1 for complete examples) from diverse sources. b. To build an
MLLM-based vision language AI assistant that can reason over visual and natural language inputs, we begin
with a SOTA vision-only self-supervised pretrained foundation encoder model, UNI, and perform further vision
language pretraining analogous to CONCH. The resulting vision encoder, CONCH-Large, is subsequently
connected to a 13 billion parameter, pretrained LLM via a multimodal projector module (not shown) to form
the complete MLLM architecture. The MLLM is finetuned via the curated instruction-following dataset to
build PathChat, a visual language AI assistant specialized for human pathology. More details about data
curation and model training can be found in PathChat dataset curation and PathChat model design and
training section of Methods respectively.
We dmonstrate the capabilities of PathChat in various applications including analysis of pathology cases
from diverse organ sites and practices (Figures 2 and 3). Additionally, we contribute, to the best of our knowl-
edge, the first high quality open-ended pathology visual question answering benchmark curated with expert
supervision (see the PathQABench: an expert-curated pathology question-answering benchmark section
of Methods for more details), making it suitable for evaluating the performance of multimodal large language
models in pathology and fulfilling a critical need amidst rapid advances of visual language multimodal AI re-
search. We evaluate our custom built vision language AI assistant for pathology, named PathChat, against both
LLaVA105, a state-of-the-art (SOTA) general domain open-source MLLM as well as LLaVA-Med118, which has
been tailored to the biomedical domain. We also compare against a SOTA commercial solution, ChatGPT-4
(powered by GPT4V), despite our model being significantly smaller and cheaper to serve. More details about
model design and training can be found in the PathChat model design and training section of Methods with
hyperparamters described in Extended Data Tables 1-3.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
Results
Performance on multiple-choice diagnostic questions
We began by assessing the capability of our PathChat MLLM to directly make a diagnosis from histology
images. For this purpose, a board-certified pathologist manually selected salient regions of interest (ROIs) from
routine H&E diagnostic whole slide images (WSIs) from both the TCGA and our in-house pathology archive
(both of which are completely withheld from model pretraining or finetuning). In total, the questions cover 29
diagnoses from 9 different major pathology practices and organ sites (Extended Data Tables 4-5). For each
organ system, the pathologist selected a set of 10 possible answers that encompasses the correct answers for
all questions within that organ system as well as other relatively common diagnoses within that organ system
(Extended Data Table 6). For each question, we consider two evaluation strategies. In the first, the image-only
setting, the model is presented with only the image and the multiple choice question as input. In the second,
the image with clinical context setting, designed to more closely mimic a real-world diagnostic workflow,
additional relevant clinical context is provided together with the histology image, including information that
may include patient age, sex, clinical history, and radiology findings as appropriate for the clinical case. In
both settings, the model is assessed for its ability to accurately select the ground truth diagnosis from the
set of possible options. We provide an illustrative example of the complete model input in Figure 2a. On
all cases (denoted as “Combined” in Figure 2b), we compare PathChat against LLaVA 1.5, a SOTA general
purpose visual language chatbot assistant, as well as LLaVA-Med, a specialized version of LLaVA finetuned for
answering biomedical related queries. Additionally, on the subset of 23 cases derived from publicly available
WSIs (denoted as “PathQABench-Public”), in addition to LLavA 1.5 and LLaVA-Med, we also compare
against GPT4V, which powers ChatGPT4, the current best in class, vision capability enabled commercial
AI assistant developed by OpenAI. All models were evaluated “as is” without any additional task-specific
finetuning, consistent with the paradigm of zero-shot transfer.
In both evaluation settings (image only and image with clinical context), PathChat convincingly out-
performs the open-source baselines LLaVA 1.5 and LLaVA-Med in terms of diagnostic accuracy (Figure 2b,
Extended Data Tables 7-9). In the image only evaluation setting, PathChat scored a 70.8% accuracy (+50%
vs. LLaVA 1.5 and +52.1% vs. LLaVA-Med) on the full combined benchmark. In line with expectation, the
performance of PathChat further improves to 81.2% accuracy (+54.1% vs. LLaVA 1.5 and LLaVA-Med) when
additional useful clinical context is provided. Specifically, we note that the addition of clinical context con-
sistently improves the accuracy of PathChat both on the private in-house cases (PathQABench-Private, +16%)
and the public TCGA cases (PathQABench-Public, +4.4%). These findings suggest that PathChat can effec-
tively and flexibly leverage multimodal information for more accurate diagnosis of histology images by simply
providing such additional non-visual information in plain natural language without specialized data processing.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Additionally, using PathQABench-Public, which only contains cases from the publicly available TCGA
WSIs, we also compare our model against the GPT-4Vision (GPT4V) model. We observe that our domain-
specific PathChat MLLM achieves higher diagnostic accuracy compared to GPT4V in both evaluation settings
on the cases tested, although it is much more accurate than the open-source MLLMs tested, especially when
clinical context is provided. Additionally, it is worth noting that guardrails appear to have been implemented
into GPT4V to sometimes prevent it from addressing queries that require examination of medical images,
and it will instead inform the user that it cannot provide a pathology interpretation and instead to consult a
medical professional. In such cases, we make a maximum of 2 additional submissions for the same query for
a total of up to 3 attempts (see Evaluation of GPT4V of the Methods section for more details). Following
this evaluation protocol, we successfully queried GPT4V for all 23 PathQABench-Public images when clinical
context is included, but only 12 out of 23 questions for the image only setting. An ultimately unsuccessful query
was treated as incorrect since the response did not address the question. However, we also report performance
on only the subset of questions that GPT4V successfully answered (Extended Data Table 10).
Performance on open-ended question answering
Beyond multiple-choice diagnostic questions, it is valuable to assess the ability of PathChat and other MLLMs
to generate coherent, reasonable, and clinically relevant responses to open-ended pathology-related inquiries
(see PathQABench: an expert-curated pathology question-answering benchmark section of Methods).
Based on cases from PathQABench-Public, a board-certified anatomic pathologist carefully open-ended ques-
tions targeting a broad spectrum of topics including microscopic image description, histologic grade and dif-
ferentiation status, risk factors, prognosis, treatment, diagnosis, immunohistochemical (IHC) tests, molecular
alterations, and other further testing. Similar to the multiple-choice evaluation, to mimic the real-world use
case of a pathology AI assistant, each question is provided to models as is, without requiring any additional
model or task-specific finetuning. The responses are then evaluated by an expert pathologist both in terms of
accuracy (i.e. a binary label of correct vs. incorrect), as well as ranking (from best to worst, ties allowed)
based on their relevance to the question, correctness, and whether it is supplemented with correct explanation
or reasoning in a succinct manner (see MLLM evaluation section of Methods for more details and Extended
Data Figures 2-4 for illustrative examples of ranked model responses). Throughout the ranking process, the
pathologist, who has not had prior interaction with each model, is also blinded to which model produced which
response and the responses were additionally randomly shuffled for each question to further minimize potential
bias towards specific models.
Overall, we find that PathChat produces on average more accurate as well as more preferable, higher
ranked responses than all other MLLMs tested. Specifically, PathChat scored an overall accuracy of 86.1% on
the (Figure 2c, Extended Data Table 11), which corresponds to a 27% improvement compared to the accuracy
score of 59.1% achieved by the runner up, GPT4V. Compared to the publicly available general purpose MLLM
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Figure 2: Multiple choice evaluation of PathChat. a. Illustrative example of a multiple-choice style di-
agnostic question. The input always includes a salient histology image ROI selected by a board-certified
anatomic pathologist and the instruction to select the most likely diagnosis from a set of possible choices. In
the image + clinical context evaluation setting that is designed to more closely mimic a real-world diagnostic
workflow, additional relevant clinical context (designed by the pathologist, shown in blue) is provided together
with the histology image and concatenated with the original instruction. b. Accuracy of MLLMs on multiple
choice-style diagnostic questions. Note that we only compare against GPT4V on questions based on publicly
available cases (PathQABench-Public). c. Accuracy of MLLMs on open-ended questions. b, c. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. d. Accuracy on different categories of questions. e. Head-to-head records
on open-ended questions for PathChat v.s. other MLLMs. Lose: said model is ranked higher than PathChat;
Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in ranking; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model.
LLaVA 1.5 (accuracy of 42.6%), and the biomedicine-specialized MLLM LLaVA-Med (accuracy of 50.4%),
the margin of improvement is even more substantial, at +43.5% and +35.7% respectively.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
When considering head-to-head records (e.g. PathChat vs. GPT4V) for model ranking judged by a
human expert, a “win” for PathChat on a question equates to PathChat’s response being ranked strictly higher
than its counterpart when considering their relative ranking. Similarly, a “tie” for PathChat means the two
models received the same rank while a “lose” means PathChat was ranked strictly lower. Against the runner
up GPT4V, PathChat had a favorable win rate of 57.4% compared to a lose rate of just 29.6% and a tie in the
remaining 13% of questions (Figure 2e, Extended Data Table 12). Once again, we observe a even larger
performance gap in favor of PathChat as compared to LLaVA 1.5 (win rate of 69.6%, lose rate of 11.3%, and
tie rate of 19.1%) and LLaVA-Med (win rate of 70.4%, lose rate of 14.8%, and tie rate of 14.8%).
These results demonstrate that overall, PathChat generates both more accurate as well as more preferable
responses to diverse pathology-related queries. Additionally, in order to better understand relative strengths and
weaknesses of different models, we further analyze the performance of different models in various subgroups
of questions (described in Extended Data Tables 13-14 with examples provided in Extended Data Figure 5).
In particular, the “Microscopy” category includes questions that test the ability of models to generate accurate
and detailed morphological descriptions of histology microscopy images and assess clinically relevant features
such as tumor differentiation and grade. Questions in the “Diagnosis” category test the ability of the models
to directly suggest a reasonable diagnosis based on the histology image available and relevant clinical context
(unlike in multiple choice questions where possible choices are provided). “Clinical” questions test the ability
to retrieve clinically relevant background knowledge about the disease in question, including risk factors, prog-
nosis and treatment. “Ancillary testing” questions test the ability of models to suggest additional testing such as
IHCs and molecular in order confirm a specific diagnosis or inform prognosis and treatment. We observed that
while GPT4V is the runner up to PathChat overall, PathChat’s responses are especially superior to GPT4V’s in
the categories that require examination of the histology image (i.e. “Microscopy” and “Diagnosis”), where the
accuracy is 83% and 73.9% for PathChat respectively vs. 29.8% and 39.1% for GPT4V (Figure 2d). Similarly,
head-to-head win rate against GPT4V reaches 72.3% and 69.6% on the two categories of questions respec-
tively, compared to the average head-to-head win-rate of 57.4%. Coupled with a lose rate against GPT4V of
only 12.8% and 13% on these categories, the results imply that PathChat is better than or as good as GPT4V in
nearly 85% of queries that emphasize histology image examination (Extended Data Tables 15-16, Extended
Data Figures 6-7). On the flip side, we found PathChat to lag somewhat behind GPT4V on “Clinical” and
“Ancillary Testing”, where PathChat achieved a respectable 92.3% and 92.5% accuracy scores compared to
GPT4V’s near perfect scores of 100% and 97.5% on the two categories respectively. This is similarly reflected
in the lower respective head-to-head rankings, where GPT4V’s response is preferred in approximately 65.4%
and 60% of such queries. We note that we included “Clinical” and “Ancillary testing” questions in order to
comprehensively assess the capabilities of AI assistant models to address pathology related queries. However,
these questions frequently do not require actual examination of the histology image but instead mostly aim to
test the model’s ability to recall background knowledge relevant to pathology (e.g. “What specific molecular
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
alterations are commonly found in disease X, and how might they influence the prognosis or therapeutic op-
tions?”). As a result, it is not too surprising that even general purpose multimodal AI assistants such as LLaVA
1.5 can often adequately answer questions in these categories and GPT4V especially excels here as it is pre-
sumably much larger and trained on more extensive knowledge of the internet than open-source models and
PathChat. Since these queries can often readily be addressed through conventional means of querying such as
internet searches or consulting a reference manual, we focus on the “Microscopy” and “Diagnosis” categories
as main indicators for the utility of different models as vision language assistants for Pathology, given that the
aforementioned conventional means of querying do not fill the need for AI-assisted visual question answering
based on pathology images. Further breakdown of model performance by sub-categories are included in Ex-
tended Data Tables 17-18. We note that despite the fact that our open-ended question answering benchmark
is specific to the domain of pathology, its size is largely comparable to the 140 questions used in an earlier
work121 for human expert evaluation of LLMs’ ability to encode general clinical knowledge.
Lastly, we note that similar to our observation in the multiple-choice evaluation, presumably due to
guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 of 115 questions submitted to GPT4V returned a successful answer
(a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for each question, see Evaluation of GPT4V of the Methods
section for more details). An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect as the response did not address
the question. However, for transparency, we record the number of unsuccessful queries for GPT4V in each
question category (Extended Data Table 19) and also report performance on only the subset of questions that
GPT4V successfully answered (Extended Data Tables 20-25).
Demonstration of PathChat on diverse use cases
In addition to evaluating PathChat on multiple choice-style questions and open-ended question answering, we
attempted to conceptualize and explore potential use cases for PathChat as an AI vision language assistant
specialized for Pathology. We observed that PathChat can analyze and describe notable morphological de-
tails in histology images, and answer questions that require background knowledge in pathology and general
biomedicine in addition to the visual input alone (Figure 3, a-c). The ability to analyze visual features and
flexibly combine them with additional clinical context and medical knowledge (simply specified via natural
language), and interpret them in the context of specific diagnostic guidelines (e.g. Gleason grading) out of the
box opens PathChat to a much wider range of applications compared to task-specific visual question answer-
ing or image captioning models finetuned on relatively small datasets with a limited scope85–89. Additionally,
the support for interactive, multi-turn conversation enables PathChat to potentially serve as a consultant for
human-in-the-loop differential diagnosis, where an initial AI-assisted assessment can be followed up with ad-
ditional clinical context, test results that are subsequently generated to narrow the differential (Figure 3e. This
may be especially valuable in cases that involve more lengthy, complex workups such as cancers of unknown
primary (CUPs) and in low-resource settings where access to experienced pathologists may be limited.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Figure 3: Exploring additional use cases of PathChat. Beyond evaluating PathChat on multiple choice-style
questions and single turn open-ended question answering, we explore additional use cases and demonstrate
examples that involve follow-up questions from users in the form of interactive, multi-turn conversations. a
PathChat can describe tumor tissue and cell morphology, infer the diagnosis, and correctly suggest potential
IHC findings grounded in relevant background knowledge about the suspected malignancy. b. PathChat can
summarize key morphological features in the histology image and based on additional clinical context, can
reasonably infer the primary origin of the tumor. c. PathChat understands and can attempt to follow well-
known guidelines on tumor grading, in this case, the Gleason grade system for prostate adenocarcinoma. d.
PathChat is familiar with different cell markers and can help potentially guide IHC interpretations. e. PathChat
can potentially be consulted to perform human-in-the-loop differential diagnosis that may require multiple
rounds of IHC workup.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Discussion
The field of computational pathology has witnessed substantial progress over the years in developing increas-
ingly accurate, task-specific predictive models based on image and/or genomics data. For histology images
specifically, there has also been growing interest in building foundational task-agnostic vision encoders pre-
trained with large amounts of unlabeled images, which can provide robust feature embeddings for diverse
supervised and unsupervised downstream workflows. However, the explosive growth in generative AI tech-
nology and specifically MLLMs, as exemplified by the likes of ChatGPT, begins to open up a possible new
frontier for both computational pathology research and real-world applications to the clinical practice of pathol-
ogy. Generalist AI models equipped with natural language understanding can utilize text as a unified medium
to both flexibly specify user intent (i.e., in the form of a custom prompt) and to produce outputs of various
levels of expressiveness (i.e., from single-word to binary or multiple choice responses to coherent sentences
with reasoning steps) that perform diverse tasks (e.g., classification, captioning, retrieval, question answering,
and more). For the field of pathology specifically, such a model can in theory have applications in a wide range
of scenarios across education and research as well as human-in-the-loop clinical decision making.
In this work, we provide a proof of concept for building a general purpose visual language AI assistant
tailored to human pathology. We also provide, to our best knowledge, the most extensive evaluation of such
technology in the field of computational pathology by comparing our model, PathChat, against both publicly-
available models developed for general machine learning and the larger domain of biomedical sciences, as well
as a SOTA commercial solution, GPT4V. We created PathQABench, a high quality, expert-curated benchmark
that aims to assess a diverse range of capabilities relevant to the practice of anatomic pathology, including
morphological examination of histology microscopic images, making diagnoses based on both histology and
clinical context, assessment of tumor grade and differentiation, suggesting further IHC/molecular testing, and
understanding of risk factors, prognosis and treatment of the underlying disease. We assessed these skills
through a combination of multiple-choice style diagnostic questions as well as open-ended questions and hu-
man expert evaluation. In both evaluation settings, we found PathChat to compare favorably to the current
best in class commercial solution GPT4V (presumably much larger and expensive to serve than PathChat),
as well as substantially outperforming the publicly available MLLMs tested in diagnostic accuracy and qual-
ity of response. Additionally, we demonstrated that the support for interactive, multi-turn conversation may
enable PathChat to handle additional use cases such as complex diagnostic workups. Considering our find-
ings, we hope PathChat can potentially find impactful applications in pathology education, research, as well as
human-in-the-loop clinical decision making as the technology matures over time.
One limitation of our model is that while it has been finetuned to follow instructions, it has not undergone
further alignment with human intent using techniques such as reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF)96. This means it may not capture certain nuances in the practice of pathology, such as occasionally not
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
knowing to request additional contextual information or test results when it is not possible or is difficult rule out
certain morphologically similar diseases based on H&E histology alone and not understanding institutional-
specific guidelines for diagnosis and treatment. It has also recently been shown that such techniques can
further improve the accuracy and lower the rate of hallucination in state of the art MLLMs. The lack of human
intent alignment combined with limited implementation and validation of guardrails, also means the model
can output unexpected, erroneous responses when non-pathology queries or images are provided as inputs
(i.e., inputs from domains not encountered during training), instead of correctly identifying those queries as
invalid, and refrain from answering. We hope future works can address these current limitations by using high-
quality expert feedback on diverse real-world cases as well as expand the capability of PathChat-like visual
language AI assistants further by supporting input and output modalities such as video and audio.
Online Methods
PathChat dataset curation
We curated a dataset of 257,004 instructions, which we call PathChatInstruct, for training PathChat to respond
to pathology-specific queries. To ensure PathChat can generalize to a diverse range of instructions, the data
encompasses several different instruction formats, including open-ended multi-turn dialogue, detailed image
description, short-answer questions, multiple choice questions, and text-only questions. A diverse set of data
sources were used to generate the instruction dataset, spanning image captions, educational articles, pathology
case reports and regions of interests extracted from in-house WSIs. Data filtering was performed for each
source individually to ensure quality and relevance for training a pathology-specific vision language assistant.
Examples of frequently used heuristics for filtering include the removal of image captions that are overly short
(e.g. < 12 words) or uninformative and overly generic (e.g. “An H&E image of tumor.”). We also removed
captions or passages related to animal pathology (keywords include: “rat”, “pig”, etc.) and experimental
studies (keywords include: “experimental”, “positive control”, etc.) using regex pattern matching. Lastly, we
include basic guardrail instruction examples, where given image-specific instructions such as “Describe this
histology image of a lung mass” when no image is provided, the model is expected to output the response of
“Sorry, I cannot assist you since you have not uploaded any image.” Additionally, when given an image not
related to pathology (sampled from MS COCO122), the model is trained to output “Sorry I can only assist you
with queries related to pathology.” Similar to LLaVA105,123, for some instruction formats, we prompt general
purpose LLMs98,108,123,124 to structure the original source text into the desired format automatically. In those
scenarios, text prompts were designed specifically for each data source and iteratively refined until a desired
data quality is achieved on a randomly audited subset of the data. Lastly, we applied extensive filtering on the
structured instructions to remove trivial questions that do not enhance the model’s understanding of pathology
(e.g. “at what magnification was the image taken”) or unsuccessful queries (e.g. “Sorry, I cannot answer your
request based on the information provided”). Overall, PathChatInstruct consists of 628,668 question answer
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
turns and 210,237 unique images of average dimension 574×716 pixels. The 257,004 instructions are roughly
categorized by “conversation” (n = 101, 175), “description” (n = 98, 821), “multiple choice” (n = 29, 987),
“free response” (n = 7, 981), “text-only” (n = 3, 040) and “guardrail” (n = 16, 000). An illustrate example of
each category is shown in Extended Data Figure 1.
PathChat model design and training
Compared to text-only large language models (LLMs), a multimodal large language model (MLLM) is trained
to understand and respond to user instructions in the form of natural language queries that may additionally
contain inputs from other modalities such as images. The support for multi-modality is essential for the domain
of histopathology since examining and interpreting visual information in high resolution microscopic images
(in conjunction with other clinical information) remains the cornerstone of the discipline and extends to many
aspects of disease diagnosis and management in modern medicine.
Inspired by LLaVA105,123, our MLLM, PathChat, consists of three key components: the vision encoder,
the multimodal projector module and the large language model. The vision encoder is responsible for encoding
the image from the original high-dimensional RGB pixel space into a low-dimensional feature representation
suitable for processing by the downstream modules. The multimodal projector connects the outputs of the
vision encoder to the large language model (LLM) by projecting the visual tokens to the same dimension as
the LLM’s embedding space for text tokens. The LLM takes the natural language instruction as input (after it
has been tokenized by a tokenizer), combines the embedded text tokens and the image token output from the
multimodal projector to form the full sequence of input tokens, and predicts the desirable response via auto-
regressive next word prediction. The produced response is finally decoded by the tokenizer back into natural
language and presented to the end user.
For the LLM, we adopt the 13 billion parameter variant from the widely used Meta Llama 298 family of
state of the art open-source LLMs, which is a decoder-only transformer-based auto-regressive language model
with 40 Transformer layers, each with 40 attention heads, an embedding dimension of 5,120, a hidden dimen-
sion of 13,824 and uses rotary positional encodings, natively supporting a maximum context length of 4,096.
Similar to LLaVa 1.5, we use a vision encoder based on the standard ViT-Large (ViT-L) architecture consisting
of 24 Transformer multi-headed attention blocks, each with 16 attention heads, an embedding dimension of
1,024 and a feed-forward hidden dimension of 4,096. The token size is 16 × 16 and we add learned absolute
positional encoding to each token. The multimodal projector consists of an attention pooling layer followed
by a 2-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The attention pooling layer (also known as a Perceiver Resampler
in some works106,125,126) uses a set of 128 learned latent queries and multiheaded cross-attention to reduce the
last layer feature map of the encoder backbone into a fixed length sequence of image tokens with an initial
dimension of 768 for increased training and inference efficiency, as well as to prevent the total sequence length
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
of tokens from potentially exceeding the context window size of the LLM. The subsequent MLP follows the
design used in Llava 1.5, and consists of a single hidden layer and GeLU activation, projecting the image to-
kens up to the embedding dimension of the LLM (i.e., 5,120 for the Llama 2 13B model). We initialize weights
of the vision encoder backbone from UNI49, a SOTA vision-only SSL-pretrained general purpose encoder for
H&E pathology and continue finetuning the encoder backbone together with the attention pooling module us-
ing the visual language pretraining recipe and paired image text data used to develop CONCH79, reproduced
in Extended Data Table 1.
We follow the MLLM training recipe of LLaVa 1.5, which involves two stages of training. In the first,
pretraining stage, the LLM weights are kept frozen and only the multimodal projector receives parameter up-
dates to learn a suitable projection from the space of image tokens to the shared embedding space of the text
tokens used by the LLM. For this simple purpose, the MLLM is supervised to simply predict the caption cor-
responding each image using roughly 100K image-caption pairs sampled from our previous dataset79, without
needing to use any curated instruction data. In the second, instruction finetuning stage, both the LLM and pro-
jector are trained end-to-end to generate responses to diverse instructions that include both natural language
and visual inputs, as described in the Dataset curation section. Specifically, given an instruction Xinstruct,
the reference answer Xans and the image Ximg, each represented as a sequence of tokenized inputs, we maxi-
mize the likelihood of each token in Xans, indexed by 1, . . . , L, under the chatbot (viewed as an autoregressive
language model):
Lclm(θprojector, θllm) = −
L
X
i=1
log p (Xans,i | Xans,1:i−1, Xinstruct, Ximg; θprojector, θllm)
(1)
This instruction tuning objective easily extends to multi-turn instruction data by conditioning on all previous
turns of instruction and reference answer. For instructions where there is no image present, Ximg is not defined
and removed from the conditioning sequence. Similarly, if multiple images accompany a given instruction,
we simply concatenate their respective image tokens, with the newline (“\n”) token inserted in-between as a
separator, and treat the full sequence as Ximg. Both pretraining and finetuning were performed using an 8 ×
NVIDIA A100 80GB GPU node. We refer readers to Extended Data Tables 2-3 for detailed hyperparameters
used in the training process.
PathQABench: an expert-curated pathology question-answering benchmark
The evaluation of powerful multimodal visual language AI models in histopathology is an outstanding chal-
lenge, and there is currently a lack of publicly available, high quality, expert curated, histopathology-centric
QA benchmark to the best of our knowledge. One possible candidate is PathVQA, which has been used in the
literature to demonstrate and evaluate the pathology image understanding capabilities of various AI models.
However, our manual audit revealed numerous types of low-quality examples in the benchmark, likely due to
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
the lack of expert review and the automated nature of the data curation workflow used by PathVQA. We illus-
trate some of such examples from the evaluation (test) split of PathVQA in Extended Data Figure 8 and use
our observation as motivation to curate new a high quality QA benchmark suitable for evaluating cutting-edge
multimodal large language models for pathology, described in detail below.
To evaluate PathChat, we curated a QA benchmark, named PathQABench, using high resolution, rep-
resentative image ROIs hand-selected by expert pathologists from routine in total 48 H&E WSIs using the
open-source QuPath digital viewer. 25 WSIs used to create PathQABench comes from in-house pathology
cases at the Brighams and Women’s Hospital that have been held-out from all stages of training of PathChat,
while the other 23 WSIs come from the public TCGA repository. In total, the WSIs cover 9 tissue sites and 29
diagnoses (see Extended Data Tables 4-5). This design choice enables us to use the subset of questions based
on publicly available WSIs, referred to as PathQABench-Public, to evaluate the SOTA commercial solution
GPT4V (powering ChatGPT-4 with vision capabilities) via API requests, without risk of violating institutional
guidelines for handling patient data. Accordingly, the subset of questions based on private in-house WSIs,
referred to as PathQABench-Private, are only used to evaluate other publicly available MLLM solutions that
we can run locally inside the hospital without transmitting the data to an external server. To curate questions in
PathQABench, a board-certified pathologist reviews each slide and selects a salient ROI from each WSI. Next,
for each case, the pathologist invents a short clinical summary statement based on the ground truth diagnosis,
which includes an appropriately devised patient age, sex and clinical symptoms and radiology findings where
applicable. The summary statement is referred to as the clinical context for the corresponding case henceforth.
An example clinical context is shown in Figure 2a. We then created both close-ended multiple choice style
diagnostic questions as well as open-ended questions that aim to assess the models capabilities in assisting with
diverse pathology-related queries, which cover a range of topics that include but not limited to just diagnosis
(Extended Data Table 13, Extended Data Figure 5).
A total of 48 multiple choice questions are created using the salient ROIs (one question per ROI). In
the multiple choice-style question evaluation setting, for each organ system, the pathologist selected a set of
10 possible answers that encompasses the correct answers for all questions within that organ system as well
as other relatively common diagnoses within that organ system (Extended Data Table 6). For each multiple
choice question, we consider two evaluation strategies. In the first image-only setting, the model is presented
with only the image and the multiple choice question as input. In the second, image + clinical context setting
that is designed to more closely mimic a real-world diagnostic workflow, the clinical context is additionally
provided together with the histology image. In both settings, the model is assessed based on its ability to
accurately select the ground truth diagnosis from the set of possible options.
In the open-ended question answering evaluation setting, we use the 23 cases from PathQABench-Public
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
to curate 5 questions per case for a total of 115 questions. The questions can be categorized broadly under
“Microscopy”, “Diagnosis”, “Clinical”, and “Ancillary testing”, as described in Extended Data Table 13.
The “Microscopy” and “Diagnosis” questions in particular focus on targeting diagnosis and morphological
examination using the histology images and additional relevant context (where applicable), which are essential
skills for the practice of anatomic pathology. On the other hand, “Clinical”, and ”Ancillary testing” are often
text-only questions that do not require visual examination of the image to answer, covering topics such as
how to use IHCs to confirm the diagnosis and background knowledge pertaining to the underlying condition.
We note that despite the fact that our open-ended question answering benchmark is specific to the domain
of pathology, its size is largely comparable to the 140 questions used in an earlier work121 for human expert
evaluation of LLMs’ ability to encode general clinical knowledge.
MLLM evaluation
We compare PathChat against the general purpose SOTA MLLM LLaVA 1.5123 as well as the medically-
focused MLLM LLaVA-Med118 using the full PathQABench dataset, and only evaluate the performance of
GPT-4V on cases from PathQABench-Public. The precise pretrained checkpoints for these models are speci-
fied in the Code availability section and the reporting summary. We use the default image processor imple-
mented by each model and use greedy decoding during inference time when possible (not currently supported
for the GPT4V API where we instead used the default arguments set by OpenAI). The evaluation of GPT4V
also requires a more involved protocol due to guardrails implemented by OpenAI, which we detail in the next
section (Evaluation of GPT4V).
For multiple choice questions, we observed that both PathChat, LLaVA 1.5 and GPT4V can output the
predicted choice in a consistent and desirable format (e.g. “A”, “A. Lung adenocarcinoma” or “- Lung adeno-
carcinoma”) which can be directly used in our evaluation pipeline to compute the accuracy score. However, we
found LLaVA-Med could not follow the instruction to answer in a concise and consistent format appropriate
for multiple choice questions and instead would always output a full sentence. Therefore, for LLaVA-Med, we
manually review each model response, extract the predicted diagnosis, assess its correctness against the ground
truth and then compute the accuracy.
For the open-ended questions, we gather the prediction for each model and present them to a board-
certified pathologist for human evaluation. When the model responses are presented, their order is randomly
shuffled and the pathologist is blinded to which model produced which response. The responses were ranked
based on, in order of importance, 1. prompt following (whether the response correctly addressed the instruc-
tion), 2. completeness of the answer, 3. succinctness and 4. use of accepted pathology terminology. Ties of two
(or more) responses were allowed. Additionally, a binary correct vs. incorrect outcome is recorded for each
response. For questions with a single best answer (e.g., “What is the most likely diagnosis?”), the responses
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
were labeled as incorrect if the single best answer was not provided. For open ended questions (e.g., “What
IHC stains would be useful in working up a glioblastoma?”), responses were labeled as incorrect if any portion
of the response was hallucinated or if the response did not answer the question at all. Correct and incorrect
labels were mutually exclusive and every response was labeled as correct or incorrect. The model responses
on all open-ended questions can be viewed in Supplementary Materials.
Evaluation of GPT4V
Evaluation of GPT4V was performed using the official API access provided by OpenAI. We observed that
guardrails appear to have been implemented into GPT4V to often prevent it from addressing queries that
require examination of histopathology images. In such instances, it will inform the user that it cannot provide
an interpretation of the pathology image and he or she should instead consult a trained medical professional.
Queries for which the response returned by GPT4V obviously refused to address the given instructions were
deemed “unsuccessful”. In such instances, we make a maximum of 2 additional re-submissions for the same
query up to a total of 3 attempts. Following this evaluation protocol, we recorded 12 out of 23 successful queries
in the multiple choice diagnostic assessment evaluation of PathQABench-Public cases when no additional
clinical context is provided as part of each question while all 23 out of 23 queries were eventually successful
when the clinical context is included. Using the same protocol, in the open-ended QA evaluation section of
PathQABench-Public, we obtained 97 out of 115 successful queries. A breakdown of successful queries by
category is provided in Extended Data Table 19.
Computing hardware and software
We used Python (version 3.10.13) for all experiments and analyses in the study. For all model training, we used
8×80GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs configured for multi-GPU training using the popular open-source deep learning
framework PyTorch (version 2.0.1, CUDA 11.8). All inference jobs were performed using 24GB NVIDIA
3090 GPUs. We use the implementation of MLLM training and inference provided by LLaVA (version 1.1.3)
and incorporate our own custom vision encoder and multimodal projector implemented in Timm (version 0.9.2)
and Pytorch. Flash Attention (version 2.3.3) and DeepSpeed (version 0.9.5) were used to enable accelerated
training of PathChat MLLM. Gradio (version 3.35.2) is used to build the interactive demo. The demo video
recording is played at 1.5× speed but text prompts, input images, and model outputs are presented as is without
editing. We used images from PathQABench and other real world cases not used for model training. Pandas
(version 2.1.3) was used for random sampling in computing 95% confidence intervals for reported metrics by
nonparametric bootstrapping (n = 1,000 iterations). Matplotlib (version 3.7.1) and Seaborn (version 0.12.2)
were used to create plots and figures. Other miscellaneous libraries used are listed in the Reporting Summary.
Data availability.
PathQABench data was curated using a combination of WSIs from the TCGA and from in-house pathology
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
database at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital. The PathQABench-Public subset of the QA benchmark will
be released upon publication to serve as a potential resource for the purpose of researching and evaluating
the capabilities of multimodal generative AI models for the field of pathology. The original TCGA WSIs and
associated clinical metadata are available from the NIH genomic data commons (portal.gdc.cancer.gov). The
PathQABench-Private subset was curated with institutional permission through IRB approval for the current
study and thus cannot be made publicly available. All requests for data collected or curated in-house will be
evaluated based on institutional and departmental policies to determine whether the data requested is subject
to intellectual property or patient privacy obligations. Instruction data was curated from image-caption pairs
in educational resources, in-house patient data and PubMed. Educational resources are subject to copyright
terms of publishers and will not be made available. The unprocessed PubMed Central Open Access dataset is
available from the NIH PubMed Central website (pmc/tools/openftlist/).
Code availability
MLLMs used for comparisons can be accessed via their respective official repository: LLaVA 1.5 (LLaVA) and
LLaVA-Med (LLaVA-Med). Similarly, the model weights can be downloaded at: Llava 1.5 (llava-v1.5-13b)
and Llava-Med (llava med in text 60k). Code to train PathChat will be made available for non-commercial
academic use once the article is published. We have documented all technical deep learning methods and
software libraries used in the study while ensuring the paper is accessible to the broader scientific audience.
Author contributions
M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W. and F.M. conceived the study and designed the experiments. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W,
R.J.C., K.I., I.L., and T.D. performed data collection and processing. M.Y.L and B.C. performed model de-
velopment. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W. and R.J.C. performed experimental analysis and interpreted the results.
R.J.C., K.I., G.G., I.L., T.D., L.P.L and A.V.P. provided feedback on the analysis. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W. and
F.M. prepared the manuscript with input from all co-authors. F.M. supervised the research.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the BWH president’s fund, BWH & MGH Pathology. R.J.C. was also
supported by the NSF Graduate Fellowship. We thank Timothy Janicki, Richard Kenny, Abe Ahmed and
the system administration staff at the MGB Enterprise Research Infrastructure & Services (ERIS) Research
Computing Core for their dedicated support in providing and maintaining access to NVIDIA A100 computing
resources.
Competing interests
A provisional patent corresponding this work has been filed by Mass General Brigham.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Extended Figure 1: Examples of instructions for finetuning MLLM. An example of each of six different
types of instructions to develop PathChat via instruction finetuning is illustrated. Bolded texts represent in-
structions provided to the model while italicized texts represent the reference outputs the model is expected
to output during training. More details on dataset curation are provided in the PathChat dataset curation
section of Methods.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Extended Figure 2: Comparing model outputs on open-ended question answering, example 1. An exam-
ple question in PathQABench-Public, for which the response by PathChat is ranked higher (considered more
preferable by the expert pathologist) than other models as it clearly and correctly addresses the query that asks
for the most probable diagnosis as well as provides a reasonable description of the image. The other models
give the same incorrect diagnosis of glioblastoma multiforme with outdated terminology. For this example, an
expert pathologist ranked the PathChat output first followed by the other three models ranked equally.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Extended Figure 3: Comparing model outputs on open-ended question answering, example 2. An exam-
ple question in PathQABench-Public for which the responses by PathChat and LLaVA-Med were considered
to be of comparable quality by an expert pathologist for producing the correct diagnosis (papillary renal cell
carcinoma) along with reasonable supporting evidence. The responses by LLaVA 1.5 and GPT4V were ranked
lower as “renal cell carcinoma” is not a sufficiently specific and valid diagnosis. For this example, an expert
pathologist ranked PathChat and LLaVA-Med tied in first place and LLaVA 1.5 and GPT4V tied for last.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
Extended Figure 4: Comparing model outputs on open-ended question answering, example 3. An exam-
ple question in PathQABench-Public for which the responses by all models were considered to be low quality
by an expert pathologist. PathChat describes a cribriform pattern of cells which is not present in the image.
LLaVA-Med does not give a specific description of the arrangement of neoplastic cells in the image and incor-
rectly claims that the image is low-power. LLaVA 1.5 describes a “dense network of cells” that is not found
in the image and gives a very general description that mostly does not pertain to the image. GPT4V gives no
correct specific description about the image at all. For this example, all models are ranked equally by an expert
pathologist.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Extended Figure 5: Example questions from PathQABench-Public. PathQABench contains 115 high qual-
ity, expert reviewed, open-ended questions created using cases from PathQABench-Public, aimed at assessing
a wide range of skills relevant to the practice of pathology. Each question is assigned one or more broad and
sub-category based on the topics and skills that it aims to assess. The broad categories are “Microscopy”, “Di-
agnosis”, “Clinical” and “Ancillary testing”. A detailed description of each category is included in Extended
Data Table 13. Examples from each broad category are illustrated here.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Extended Figure 6: Performance on PathQABench open-ended questions stratified by broad categories.
We analyze the head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs in each broad category of ques-
tions. For each competing model (LLaVA 1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the win/tie/lose rate of
PathChat against said model. Win (green): PathChat is ranked higher than the model; Tie (blue): PathChat is
tied with the model in ranking; Lose (blue): PathChat is ranked lower than the model.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
Extended Figure 7: Performance on PathQABench open-ended questions stratified by sub-categories.
We further analyze the head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs in each sub-category of
questions. For each competing model (LLaVA 1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the win/tie/lose rate of
PathChat against said model. Win (green): PathChat is ranked higher than the model; Tie (blue): PathChat is
tied with the model in ranking; Lose (blue): PathChat is ranked lower than the model.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
Extended Figure 8: Examples of low-quality question answer pairs from PathVQA. While PathVQA has
been widely used as a benchmark to assess the pathology image understanding capabilities of AI models, we
found that it consists of many low-quality examples and therefore cannot reliably serve its purpose. Here we
show just a mere handful of low-quality examples from the PathVQA test set to illustrate numerous types of
issues with the benchmark. Q: question; A: ground truth answer provided in PathVQA. As shown, low-quality
questions are poorly constructed, vague, non-specific to pathology or paired with non-pathology images, while
low-quality ground truths can similarly be vague, non-specific to pathology, and sometimes even nonsensical or
contradictory. Overall, due to the lack of expert review and the automated nature of the data curation workflow
of PathVQA, questions are frequently phrased in an unnatural tone, while answers are brief, mostly without
explanation, do not explore alternative possibilities to open-ended questions, and frequently erroneous. These
observations motivated us to curate PathQABench as a high-quality evaluation benchmark for pathology VQA.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
Hyperparameter
Value
Automatic mixed precision
FP16
Batch size
192
Gradient accumulation steps
4
Learning rate scheduler
Cosine
Warmup steps
250
Peak learning rate
1e-4
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
AdamW ϵ
1e-8
Weight decay
0.2
Softmax temperature
Learned
Epochs
20
Extended Data Table 1: Hyperparameters used in visual-language pretraining. Batch size refers to the
total batch size across GPUs. Effective batch size used for optimization is batch size × gradient accumulation
steps. Learning rate is increased from zero linearly to the peak learning rate over the course of warmup steps
and decays back to zero following the learning rate scheduler. The maximum sequence length for captions is
set to 128. Non-squared images are first padded to square and then resized to 448 × 448. The same image
preprocessor is used in all subsequent stages of model training and evaluation.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Hyperparameter
Value
Automatic mixed precision
BF16
DeepSpeed ZeRO
Stage 3
LLM max. context length
4,096
Batch size
128
Learning rate scheduler
Cosine
Warmup ratio
0.03
Peak learning rate
1e-3
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
AdamW ϵ
1e-8
Weight decay
0.
Gradient clipping max. norm
1.0
Training epochs
1
Gradient checkpointing
Yes
TF32
Yes
Extended Data Table 2: Hyperparameters used in PathChat model pretraining. 8 × 80GB NVIDIA
A100 GPUs were used for training. Batch size refers to the effective batch size (i.e., the total batch size across
GPUs). The learning rate is increased from zero linearly to the peak learning rate over the course of total
number batches × warmup ratio steps and and decays back to zero following the learning rate scheduler.
Hyperparameter
Value
Automatic mixed precision
BF16
DeepSpeed ZeRO
Stage 3
LLM max. context length
4,096
Batch size
64
Gradient accumulation steps
2
Learning rate scheduler
Cosine
Warmup ratio
0.03
Peak learning rate
2e-5
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
AdamW ϵ
1e-8
Weight decay
0.
Gradient clipping max. norm
1.0
Training epochs
1
Gradient checkpointing
Yes
TF32
Yes
Extended Data Table 3: Hyperparameters used in PathChat model finetuning. 8 × 80GB NVIDIA A100
GPUs were used for training. Batch size refers to the total batch size across GPUs. The effective batch size
used for optimization is batch size × gradient accumulation steps. The learning rate is increased from zero
linearly to the peak learning rate over the course of total number batches × warmup ratio steps and decays
back to zero following the learning rate scheduler.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Organ
PathQABench-Public
PathQABench-Private
Total
GU
7
8
15
PHB
3
1
4
Brain
2
3
5
Lung
2
3
5
GI
2
2
4
H&N
2
3
5
GYN
2
2
4
Breast
2
2
4
Skin
1
1
2
Total
23
25
48
Extended Data Table 4: Organ distribution of cases in PathQABench. GI: Gastrointestinal, GU: Geni-
tourinary, GYN: Gynecology, H&N: Head and Neck, PHB: Pancreaticohepatobiliary.
Organ
Included diagnoses
Brain
Ependymoma, Glioblastoma, Oligodendroglioma, Pilocytic astrocy-
toma
Breast
Invasive ductal carcinoma, Invasive lobular carcinoma
GI
Colon adenocarcinoma, Stomach adenocarcinoma
GU
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, Clear cell renal cell carcinoma,
Mixed germ cell tumor, Papillary renal cell carcinoma, Prostatic ade-
nocarcinoma, Renal oncocytoma, Seminoma, Testicular lymphoma,
Urothelial carcinoma
GYN
High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, Uterine endometrioid carcinoma
H&N
Adenoid cystic carcinoma, Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma,
Papillary thyroid carcinoma
Lung
Lung adenocarcinoma, Lung squamous cell carcinoma, Typical carci-
noid tumor
PHB
Cholangiocarcinoma, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Pancreatic adenocar-
cinoma
Skin
Cutaneous melanoma
Extended Data Table 5: Included diagnoses for PathQABench by organ. GI: Gastrointestinal, GU: Geni-
tourinary, GYN: Gynecology, H&N: Head and Neck, PHB: Pancreaticohepatobiliary.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Organ
Multiple choice options
Brain
Pilocytic astrocytoma, Ependymoma, Glioblastoma, Pleomorphic xan-
thoastrocytoma, Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, Oligoden-
droglioma, Subependymoma, Ganglioglioma, Medulloblastoma, Neu-
rocytoma
GI
Colon adenocarcinoma, Stomach adenocarcinoma, Esophageal squa-
mous cell carcinoma, Peutz-jeghers polyp, Sessile serrated adenoma,
Hyerplastic polyp, Malt lymphoma, Ulcerative colitis, Neuroendocrine
tumor, Gastrointestinal stromal tumor
GU
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, Clear cell renal cell carcinoma,
Papillary renal cell carcinoma, Renal oncocytoma, Prostatic stromal sar-
coma, Urothelial carcinoma, Prostatic adenocarcinoma, Testicular lym-
phoma, Seminoma, Mixed germ cell tumor
GYN and Breast
High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, Low-grade serous ovarian car-
cinoma, Mucinous cystadenoma, Uterine endometrioid carcinoma, In-
vasive ductal carcinoma, Invasive lobular carcinoma, Phyllodes tumor,
Cervical squamous cell carcinoma, Dcis, Paget disease
Head & Neck
Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, Acinic cell carcinoma, Ade-
noid cystic carcinoma, Mucoepidermoid carcinoma, Papillary thyroid
carcinoma, Medullary thyroid carcinoma, Pleomorphic adenoma, Mu-
cosal melanoma, Squamous papilloma, Nut carcinoma
Lung
Lung adenocarcinoma,
Lung squamous cell carcinoma,
Typical
carcinoid tumor, Atypical carcinoid tumor, Hamartoma of lung,
Meningothelial-like nodule, Pneumocytoma, Small cell carcinoma,
Large cell carcinoma, Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
PHB
Hepatocellular carcinoma, Pancreatic adenocarcinoma, Cholangiocar-
cinoma, Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, Gallbladder adenocarci-
noma, Cirrhosis, Hepatoblastoma, Intraductal papillary mucinous neo-
plasm, Mucinous cystic neoplasm, Fibrolamellar carcinoma
Skin
Cutaneous melanoma, Basal cell carcinoma, Squamous cell carcinoma,
Merkel cell carcinoma, Mycosis fungoides, Verruca vulgaris, Der-
matofibroma, Blue nevus, Dysplastic nevus, Hidradenoma
Extended Data Table 6: Options for multiple choice diagnostic questions in PathQABench by organ. For
each organ system, the pathologist selected a set of 10 possible answers that encompasses the correct answers
for all questions within that organ system as well as other relatively common diagnoses within that organ
system. Finally, when each multiple choice question is constructed using the above options, the order in each
the options appear is randomized to ensure the correct answer is equally likely to be slotted into any location
among the possible choices. GI: Gastrointestinal, GU: Genitourinary, GYN: Gynecology, H&N: Head and
Neck, PHB: Pancreaticohepatobiliary.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Model
Combined
Combined w/ Context
PathChat
0.708 (0.583, 0.833)
0.812 (0.708, 0.917)
LLaVA-Med
0.188 (0.083, 0.292)
0.271 (0.167, 0.396)
LLaVA 1.5
0.208 (0.104, 0.333)
0.271 (0.166, 0.417)
Extended Data Table 7: Performance on PathQABench multiple-choice diagnostic questions. Accuracy is
reported on the full set of PathQABench multiple choice questions (n = 48) in both the image only evaluation
setting and the image + clinical context evaluation setting (denoted as “w/ Context”). 95% confidence intervals
from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM evaluation in Methods.
Model
PathQABench-Public
PathQABench-Public w/ Context
PathChat
0.826 (0.652, 0.957)
0.870 (0.696, 1.000)
GPT4V
∗0.217 (0.043, 0.391)
0.696 (0.478, 0.870)
LLaVA-Med
0.130 (0.000, 0.261)
0.174 (0.043, 0.348)
LLaVA 1.5
0.174 (0.043, 0.348)
0.304 (0.130, 0.479)
Extended Data Table 8: Performance on PathQABench-Public multiple-choice diagnostic questions.
Accuracy is reported on the PathQABench-Public multiple choice questions (n = 23) in both the image only
evaluation setting and the image + clinical context evaluation setting (denoted as “w/ Context”). 95% con-
fidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM evaluation
in Methods. ∗Note that due to guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 12 / 23 questions submitted to the
API yielded successful answers for PathQABench-Public in the image only setting (a maximum number of 3
attempts were made for each question). An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect since the response did
not address the question. We also report performance just on the subset of questions that yielded successful
queries for GPT4V in Extended Data Table 10. In the image + clinical context setting, all questions were
successfully answered by GPT4V. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
Model
PathQABench-Private
PathQABench-Private w/ Context
PathChat
0.600 (0.400, 0.800)
0.760 (0.600, 0.920)
LLaVA-Med
0.240 (0.080, 0.400)
0.360 (0.160, 0.560)
LLaVA 1.5
0.240 (0.080, 0.400)
0.240 (0.080, 0.440)
Extended Data Table 9: Performance on PathQABench-Private multiple-choice diagnostic questions.
Accuracy is reported on the PathQABench-Private multiple choice questions (n = 25) in both the image
only evaluation setting and the image + clinical context evaluation setting (denoted as “w/ Context”). 95%
confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM evaluation
in Methods.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
Model
PathQABench-Public
PathQABench-Public w/ Context
PathChat
0.667 (0.417, 0.917)
0.870 (0.696, 1.000)
GPT4V
0.417 (0.167, 0.750)
0.696 (0.478, 0.870)
LLaVA-Med
0.083 (0.000, 0.250)
0.174 (0.043, 0.348)
LLaVA 1.5
0.167 (0.000, 0.417)
0.304 (0.130, 0.479)
Extended Data Table 10: Performance on PathQABench-Public multiple-choice diagnostic questions,
restricted to sucessful GPT4V queries. Accuracy is reported on the subset of PathQABench-Public multiple
choice questions for which GPTV successfully answered the question (i.e., did not refuse to give an answer
within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls), for both the image only evaluation setting (n = 12) and
the image + clinical context evaluation setting (denoted as “w/ Context”, n = 23). 95% confidence intervals
from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM evaluation in Methods.
Model
Accuracy
PathChat
0.861 (0.791, 0.922)
GPT4V∗
0.591 (0.504, 0.670)
LLaVA 1.5
0.426 (0.330, 0.513)
LLaVA-Med
0.504 (0.417, 0.600)
Extended Data Table 11: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. See Extended Data
Table 15 and 17 for accuracy stratified by category. ∗Note that due to guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only
97 / 115 questions submitted to the API yielded successful answers for PathQABench-Public (a maximum
number of 3 attempts were made for each question). An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect since the
response did not address the question. We also report performance just on the subset of questions that yielded
successful queries for GPT4V in Extended Data Table 20. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in
Methods.
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
GPT4V∗
0.296 (0.209, 0.374)
0.130 (0.078, 0.191)
0.574 (0.478, 0.661)
LLaVA-Med
0.148 (0.087, 0.217)
0.148 (0.087, 0.217)
0.704 (0.617, 0.791)
LLaVA 1.5
0.113 (0.061, 0.174)
0.191 (0.122, 0.270)
0.696 (0.609, 0.783)
Extended Data Table 12:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions. For each competing model (GPT4V, LLaVA-Med, LLaVA 1.5), we
compute the lose/tie/win rate (n = 115) of PathChat against said model. Lose: said model is ranked higher than
PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in ranking; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model. 95%
confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see PathChat model
evaluation in Methods. ∗Note that due to guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 / 115 queries to the
API yielded successful answers for PathQABench-Public (a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for
each question). An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect (and therefore ranked as last or tied for last)
since the response did not address the question. We also report performance just on the subset of questions
that yielded successful queries for GPT4V in Extended Data Table 23. For more details see Evaluation of
GPT4V in Methods.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
Broad Category
Description
Microscopy
Questions test the ability of models to generate accurate and detailed
morphological descriptions of histology microscopy images and assess
clinically relevant features such as tumor differentiation and grade
Sub-categories: Microscopic description, Differentiation, Grading
Diagnosis
Questions test the ability of models to directly suggest a reasonable
diagnosis based on the histology image available and relevant clinical
context
Sub-categories: Diagnosis
Clinical
Questions test the ability of models to retrieve clinically relevant back-
ground knowledge about the disease in question, including risk factors,
prognosis and treatment.
Sub-categories: Risks, Prognosis, Treatment
Ancillary testing
Questions test the ability of models to suggest additional testing such as
IHCs and molecular to confirm a specific diagnosis
Sub-categories: IHC, Molecular, Further testing
Extended Data Table 13: Categorization of open-ended questions in PathQABench. Number of questions
in each category is summarized in Extended Data Table 14. Some questions may fit the description of more
than one category or sub-category. Examples of each category can be found in Extended Data Figure 5.
Broad category
Count
Narrow category
Count
Microscopy
47
Microscopic Description
27
Differentiation
20
Grading
20
Diagnosis
23
Diagnosis
23
Clinical
26
Risk Factors
4
Prognosis
20
Treatment
22
Ancillary Testing
40
IHC
17
Molecular
21
Other Testing
4
Extended Data Table 14: Broad and sub-categories for PathQABench open-ended questions. In to-
tal of 115 questions were curated and reviewed by a board-certified anatomic pathologist from 23 cases in
PathQABench-Public. Each question may fall under more than one category.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
Category
PathChat
GPT4V∗
LLaVA-Med
LLaVA 1.5
Microscopy
0.830 (0.702, 0.936)
0.298 (0.170, 0.426)
0.426 (0.298, 0.574)
0.404 (0.277, 0.532)
Diagnosis
0.739 (0.565, 0.913)
0.391 (0.217, 0.609)
0.435 (0.260, 0.652)
0.130 (0.000, 0.304)
Clinical
0.923 (0.808, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.692 (0.500, 0.846)
0.769 (0.614, 0.923)
Ancillary Testing
0.925 (0.850, 1.000)
0.975 (0.925, 1.000)
0.575 (0.425, 0.725)
0.525 (0.350, 0.675)
Extended Data Table 15: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model, stratified by broad categories. See Extended Data Table 17 for accuracy stratified by category.
∗Note that due to guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 / 115 questions submitted to the API yielded
successful answers for PathQABench-Public (a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for each question).
An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect since the response did not address the question. We also report
performance just on the subset of questions that yielded successful queries for GPT4V in Extended Data
Table 21. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
Category
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
Microscopy
GPT4V∗
0.128 (0.043, 0.234)
0.149 (0.064, 0.255)
0.723 (0.596, 0.851)
LLaVA-Med
0.128 (0.043, 0.234)
0.213 (0.106, 0.319)
0.660 (0.511, 0.787)
LLaVA 1.5
0.064 (0.021, 0.149)
0.213 (0.106, 0.340)
0.723 (0.596, 0.851)
Diagnosis
GPT4V∗
0.130 (0.043, 0.304)
0.174 (0.043, 0.348)
0.696 (0.478, 0.870)
LLaVA-Med
0.130 (0.043, 0.261)
0.174 (0.043, 0.316)
0.696 (0.522, 0.870)
LLaVA 1.5
0.043 (0.043, 0.174)
0.217 (0.086, 0.391)
0.739 (0.565, 0.913)
Clinical
GPT4V∗
0.654 (0.500, 0.846)
0.154 (0.038, 0.308)
0.192 (0.077, 0.346)
LLaVA-Med
0.231 (0.077, 0.423)
0.154 (0.038, 0.308)
0.615 (0.423, 0.808)
LLaVA 1.5
0.346 (0.154, 0.538)
0.269 (0.115, 0.423)
0.385 (0.192, 0.577)
Ancillary Testing
GPT4V∗
0.600 (0.425, 0.750)
0.050 (0.025, 0.125)
0.350 (0.200, 0.525)
LLaVA-Med
0.175 (0.075, 0.300)
0.025 (0.025, 0.098)
0.800 (0.675, 0.900)
LLaVA 1.5
0.175 (0.075, 0.300)
0.150 (0.050, 0.275)
0.675 (0.525, 0.825)
Extended Data Table 16:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions, stratified by broad categories. For each competing model (LLaVA
1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the lose/tie/win rate of PathChat against said model. Within each
category, Lose: said model is ranked higher than PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in rank-
ing; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are in-
cluded in parentheses. For more details see PathChat model evaluation in Methods. ∗Note that due to
guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 / 115 questions submitted to the API yielded successful answers
for PathQABench-Public (a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for each question). An unsuccessful
query was treated as incorrect (and therefore ranked as last or tied for last) since the response did not address
the question. We also report performance just on the subset of questions that yielded successful queries for
GPT4V in Extended Data Table 24. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Category
PathChat
GPT4V∗
LLaVA-Med
LLaVA 1.5
Microscopic
0.852 (0.704, 0.963)
0.333 (0.148, 0.519)
0.370 (0.185, 0.556)
0.333 (0.148, 0.519)
Differentiation
0.800 (0.600, 0.950)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
0.450 (0.200, 0.651)
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
Grading
0.750 (0.550, 0.950)
0.150 (0.000, 0.300)
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
Diagnosis
0.739 (0.565, 0.913)
0.391 (0.217, 0.609)
0.435 (0.260, 0.652)
0.130 (0.000, 0.304)
Risk factors
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
Prognosis
0.950 (0.850, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.550, 0.950)
0.850 (0.700, 1.000)
Treatment
0.955 (0.864, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.727 (0.545, 0.909)
0.773 (0.591, 0.955)
IHC
0.882 (0.706, 1.000)
0.941 (0.824, 1.000)
0.529 (0.294, 0.765)
0.235 (0.059, 0.412)
Molecular
0.952 (0.857, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.524 (0.332, 0.714)
0.619 (0.429, 0.810)
Other Testing
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
Extended Data Table 17: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model, stratified by sub-categories. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in paren-
theses. ∗Note that due to guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 / 115 questions submitted to the API
yielded successful answers for PathQABench-Public (a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for each
question). An unsuccessful query was treated as incorrect since the response did not address the question. We
also report performance just on the subset of questions that yielded successful queries for GPT4V in Extended
Data Table 22. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
Category
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
Microscopic
GPT4V∗
0.222 (0.074, 0.407)
0.074 (0.037, 0.185)
0.704 (0.519, 0.852)
LLaVA-Med
0.148 (0.037, 0.296)
0.148 (0.037, 0.296)
0.704 (0.519, 0.852)
LLaVA 1.5
0.037 (0.037, 0.111)
0.185 (0.037, 0.333)
0.778 (0.593, 0.926)
Differentiation
GPT4V∗
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
0.750 (0.550, 0.900)
LLaVA-Med
0.050 (0.000, 0.200)
0.300 (0.100, 0.500)
0.650 (0.450, 0.850)
LLaVA 1.5
0.100 (0.000, 0.250)
0.200 (0.050, 0.400)
0.700 (0.500, 0.900)
Grading
GPT4V∗
0.050 (0.050, 0.150)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
0.700 (0.500, 0.900)
LLaVA-Med
0.150 (0.050, 0.300)
0.300 (0.100, 0.500)
0.550 (0.350, 0.800)
LLaVA 1.5
0.150 (0.050, 0.350)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
0.600 (0.400, 0.800)
Diagnosis
GPT4V∗
0.130 (0.043, 0.304)
0.174 (0.043, 0.348)
0.696 (0.478, 0.870)
LLaVA-Med
0.130 (0.043, 0.261)
0.174 (0.043, 0.316)
0.696 (0.522, 0.870)
LLaVA 1.5
0.043 (0.043, 0.174)
0.217 (0.086, 0.391)
0.739 (0.565, 0.913)
Risk Factors
GPT4V∗
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
LLaVA-Med
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
Prognosis
GPT4V∗
0.650 (0.450, 0.850)
0.100 (0.050, 0.250)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
LLaVA-Med
0.300 (0.100, 0.500)
0.050 (0.000, 0.160)
0.650 (0.449, 0.850)
LLaVA 1.5
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
0.150 (0.050, 0.300)
0.400 (0.200, 0.600)
Treatment
GPT4V∗
0.682 (0.500, 0.864)
0.136 (0.045, 0.273)
0.182 (0.045, 0.364)
LLaVA-Med
0.273 (0.091, 0.455)
0.091 (0.045, 0.227)
0.636 (0.455, 0.818)
LLaVA 1.5
0.364 (0.182, 0.591)
0.273 (0.091, 0.455)
0.364 (0.182, 0.545)
IHC
GPT4V∗
0.529 (0.235, 0.765)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.471 (0.235, 0.765)
LLaVA-Med
0.176 (0.059, 0.353)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.824 (0.647, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.059 (0.059, 0.176)
0.059 (0.000, 0.176)
0.882 (0.706, 1.000)
Molecular
GPT4V∗
0.762 (0.571, 0.905)
0.095 (0.048, 0.238)
0.143 (0.048, 0.286)
LLaVA-Med
0.190 (0.048, 0.352)
0.048 (0.048, 0.143)
0.762 (0.571, 0.952)
LLaVA 1.5
0.286 (0.095, 0.476)
0.238 (0.048, 0.429)
0.476 (0.286, 0.714)
Other Testing
GPT4V∗
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
LLaVA-Med
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
Extended Data Table 18:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions, stratified by sub-categories. For each competing model (LLaVA
1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the lose/tie/win rate of PathChat against said model. Within each
category, Lose: said model is ranked higher than PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in rank-
ing; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are in-
cluded in parentheses. For more details see PathChat model evaluation in Methods. ∗Note that due to
guardrails implemented by GPT4V, only 97 / 115 questions submitted to the API yielded successful answers
for PathQABench-Public (a maximum number of 3 attempts were made for each question). An unsuccessful
query was treated as incorrect (and therefore ranked as last or tied for last) since the response did not address
the question. We also report performance just on the subset of questions that yielded successful queries for
GPT4V in Extended Data Table 25. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
Broad category
Count
Narrow category
Count
Microscopy
33 / 47
Microscopic Description
21 / 27
Differentiation
12 / 20
Grading
12 / 20
Diagnosis
19 / 23
Diagnosis
19 / 23
Clinical
26 / 26
Risk Factors
4 / 4
Prognosis
20 / 20
Treatment
22 / 22
Ancillary Testing
39 / 40
IHC
16 / 17
Molecular
21 / 21
Other Testing
4 / 4
Extended Data Table 19: Broad and sub-categories for PathQABench open-ended questions succesfully
answered by GPT4V In total of 115 questions were curated and reviewed by a board-certified anatomic
pathologist from 23 cases in PathQABench-Public. Each question may fall under more than one category. For
each category, we indicate how many of the total questions were successfully answered by GPT4V within a
maximum of 3 attempts (see Evaluation of GPT4V of Methods).
Model
Accuracy
PathChat
0.875 (0.802, 0.938)
GPT4V
0.708 (0.615, 0.792)
LLaVA-Med
0.542 (0.448, 0.646)
LLaVA 1.5
0.458 (0.354, 0.562)
Extended Data Table 20: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model, restricted to successful GPT4V queries. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are
included in parentheses. See Extended Data Table 21 for accuracy stratified by category. Accuracy is reported
on the subset of PathQABench-Public open-ended questions (n = 97) for which GPT4V successfully answered
the question (i.e., did not refuse to give an answer within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls). For
more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
Category
PathChat
GPT4V
LLaVA-Med
LLaVA 1.5
Microscopy
0.812 (0.656, 0.938)
0.438 (0.281, 0.595)
0.500 (0.312, 0.688)
0.438 (0.281, 0.625)
Diagnosis
0.789 (0.632, 0.947)
0.474 (0.263, 0.684)
0.368 (0.158, 0.580)
0.158 (0.000, 0.316)
Clinical
0.923 (0.808, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.692 (0.500, 0.846)
0.769 (0.614, 0.923)
Ancillary Testing
0.923 (0.821, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.590 (0.436, 0.744)
0.538 (0.385, 0.692)
Extended Data Table 21: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model, stratified by broad categories and restricted to successful GPT4V queries. 95% confidence
intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. See Extended Data Table 22 for accuracy stratified
by sub-category. Accuracy is reported on the subset of PathQABench-Public open-ended questions (n =
97) for which GPT4V successfully answered the question (i.e., did not refuse to give an answer within the
maximum number of 3 attempted API calls). For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
Category
PathChat
GPT4V
LLaVA-Med
LLaVA 1.5
Microscopic
0.800 (0.600, 0.950)
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
0.350 (0.150, 0.550)
0.400 (0.200, 0.650)
Differentiation
0.833 (0.583, 1.000)
0.417 (0.167, 0.669)
0.667 (0.417, 0.917)
0.417 (0.167, 0.667)
Grading
0.750 (0.500, 1.000)
0.250 (0.000, 0.500)
0.667 (0.417, 0.917)
0.500 (0.250, 0.750)
Diagnosis
0.789 (0.632, 0.947)
0.474 (0.263, 0.684)
0.368 (0.158, 0.580)
0.158 (0.000, 0.316)
Risk factors
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
Prognosis
0.950 (0.850, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.550, 0.950)
0.850 (0.700, 1.000)
Treatment
0.955 (0.864, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.727 (0.545, 0.909)
0.773 (0.591, 0.955)
IHC
0.875 (0.688, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.562 (0.312, 0.812)
0.250 (0.062, 0.500)
Molecular
0.952 (0.857, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.524 (0.332, 0.714)
0.619 (0.429, 0.810)
Other Testing
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
0.750 (0.250, 1.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
Extended Data Table 22: Proportion of open-ended questions in PathQABench correctly answered by
each model, stratified by sub-categories and restricted to successful GPT4V queries. 95% confidence
intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. Accuracy is reported on the subset of PathQABench-
Public open-ended questions (n = 97) for which GPT4V successfully answered the question (i.e., did not
refuse to give an answer within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls). For more details see Evalua-
tion of GPT4V in Methods.
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
GPT4V
0.351 (0.268, 0.454)
0.113 (0.052, 0.175)
0.536 (0.433, 0.629)
LLaVA-Med
0.144 (0.082, 0.216)
0.134 (0.072, 0.206)
0.722 (0.629, 0.804)
LLaVA 1.5
0.113 (0.052, 0.175)
0.206 (0.124, 0.299)
0.680 (0.588, 0.773)
Extended Data Table 23:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions, restricted to successful GPT4V queries For each competing model
(GPT4V, LLaVA-Med, LLaVA 1.5), we compute the lose/tie/win rate of PathChat against said model on the
subset of questions (n = 97) for which GPT4V successfully answered the question (i.e., did not refuse to give
an answer within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls). Lose: said model is ranked higher than
PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in ranking; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model.
95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM model
evaluation in Methods. For more details see Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
Category
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
Microscopy
GPT4V∗
0.182 (0.061, 0.333)
0.152 (0.030, 0.273)
0.667 (0.515, 0.818)
LLaVA-Med
0.121 (0.030, 0.242)
0.212 (0.091, 0.364)
0.667 (0.515, 0.818)
LLaVA 1.5
0.030 (0.030, 0.091)
0.303 (0.182, 0.455)
0.667 (0.515, 0.818)
Diagnosis
GPT4V∗
0.158 (0.000, 0.316)
0.105 (0.053, 0.263)
0.737 (0.526, 0.895)
LLaVA-Med
0.105 (0.000, 0.263)
0.158 (0.053, 0.316)
0.737 (0.578, 0.895)
LLaVA 1.5
0.053 (0.000, 0.158)
0.158 (0.053, 0.316)
0.789 (0.632, 0.947)
Clinical
GPT4V∗
0.654 (0.500, 0.846)
0.154 (0.038, 0.308)
0.192 (0.077, 0.346)
LLaVA-Med
0.231 (0.077, 0.423)
0.154 (0.038, 0.308)
0.615 (0.423, 0.808)
LLaVA 1.5
0.346 (0.154, 0.538)
0.269 (0.115, 0.423)
0.385 (0.192, 0.577)
Ancillary Testing
GPT4V∗
0.615 (0.462, 0.744)
0.051 (0.026, 0.128)
0.333 (0.205, 0.487)
LLaVA-Med
0.179 (0.077, 0.308)
0.026 (0.026, 0.103)
0.795 (0.667, 0.923)
LLaVA 1.5
0.179 (0.077, 0.308)
0.154 (0.051, 0.282)
0.667 (0.513, 0.821)
Extended Data Table 24:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions, stratified by broad categories, restricted to successful GPT4V
queries. For each competing model (LLaVA 1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the lose/tie/win rate
of PathChat against said model on the subset of questions (n = 97) for which GPT4V successfully answered
the question (i.e., did not refuse to give an answer within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls).
Within each category, Lose: said model is ranked higher than PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model
in ranking; Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are
included in parentheses. For more details see MLLM model evaluation in Methods. For more details see
Evaluation of GPT4V in Methods.
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
Category
PathChat vs. model
Lose
Tie
Win
Microscopic
GPT4V∗
0.286 (0.095, 0.476)
0.095 (0.048, 0.238)
0.619 (0.429, 0.810)
LLaVA-Med
0.095 (0.048, 0.238)
0.190 (0.048, 0.381)
0.714 (0.524, 0.905)
LLaVA 1.5
0.048 (0.048, 0.143)
0.238 (0.095, 0.429)
0.714 (0.524, 0.905)
Differentiation
GPT4V∗
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.250 (0.083, 0.500)
0.750 (0.500, 1.000)
LLaVA-Med
0.083 (0.000, 0.250)
0.250 (0.083, 0.500)
0.667 (0.333, 0.917)
LLaVA 1.5
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.333 (0.083, 0.667)
0.667 (0.333, 0.917)
Grading
GPT4V∗
0.083 (0.000, 0.250)
0.250 (0.083, 0.500)
0.667 (0.417, 0.917)
LLaVA-Med
0.167 (0.000, 0.417)
0.333 (0.083, 0.583)
0.500 (0.250, 0.750)
LLaVA 1.5
0.083 (0.000, 0.250)
0.417 (0.167, 0.667)
0.500 (0.250, 0.750)
Diagnosis
GPT4V∗
0.158 (0.000, 0.316)
0.105 (0.053, 0.263)
0.737 (0.526, 0.895)
LLaVA-Med
0.105 (0.000, 0.263)
0.158 (0.053, 0.316)
0.737 (0.578, 0.895)
LLaVA 1.5
0.053 (0.000, 0.158)
0.158 (0.053, 0.316)
0.789 (0.632, 0.947)
Risk Factors
GPT4V∗
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
LLaVA-Med
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.250 (0.000, 0.750)
0.500 (0.000, 1.000)
Prognosis
GPT4V∗
0.650 (0.450, 0.850)
0.100 (0.050, 0.250)
0.250 (0.100, 0.450)
LLaVA-Med
0.300 (0.100, 0.500)
0.050 (0.000, 0.160)
0.650 (0.449, 0.850)
LLaVA 1.5
0.450 (0.250, 0.650)
0.150 (0.050, 0.300)
0.400 (0.200, 0.600)
Treatment
GPT4V∗
0.682 (0.500, 0.864)
0.136 (0.045, 0.273)
0.182 (0.045, 0.364)
LLaVA-Med
0.273 (0.091, 0.455)
0.091 (0.045, 0.227)
0.636 (0.455, 0.818)
LLaVA 1.5
0.364 (0.182, 0.591)
0.273 (0.091, 0.455)
0.364 (0.182, 0.545)
IHC
GPT4V∗
0.562 (0.312, 0.812)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.438 (0.188, 0.688)
LLaVA-Med
0.188 (0.062, 0.375)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.812 (0.625, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.062 (0.062, 0.250)
0.062 (0.000, 0.188)
0.875 (0.688, 1.000)
Molecular
GPT4V∗
0.762 (0.571, 0.905)
0.095 (0.048, 0.238)
0.143 (0.048, 0.286)
LLaVA-Med
0.190 (0.048, 0.352)
0.048 (0.048, 0.143)
0.762 (0.571, 0.952)
LLaVA 1.5
0.286 (0.095, 0.476)
0.238 (0.048, 0.429)
0.476 (0.286, 0.714)
Other Testing
GPT4V∗
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
LLaVA-Med
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
LLaVA 1.5
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
0.000 (0.000, 0.000)
1.000 (1.000, 1.000)
Extended Data Table 25:
Head-to-head performance of PathChat against other MLLMs on
PathQABench open-ended questions, stratified by sub-categories, restricted to sucessful GPT4V queries.
For each competing model (LLaVA 1.5, LLaVA-Med, GPT4V), we compute the lose/tie/win rate of PathChat
against said model on the subset of questions (n = 97) for which GPT4V successfully answered the question
(i.e., did not refuse to give an answer within the maximum number of 3 attempted API calls). Within each
category, Lose: said model is ranked higher than PathChat; Tie: PathChat is tied with the model in ranking;
Win: PathChat is ranked higher than the model. 95% confidence intervals from bootstrapping are included in
parentheses. For more details see MLLM evaluation in Methods.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
References
1. Madabhushi, A. & Lee, G. Image analysis and machine learning in digital pathology: Challenges and
opportunities. Medical image analysis 33, 170–175 (2016).
2. Shmatko, A., Ghaffari Laleh, N., Gerstung, M. & Kather, J. N. Artificial intelligence in histopathology:
enhancing cancer research and clinical oncology. Nature Cancer 3, 1026–1038 (2022).
3. Song, A. H. et al. Artificial intelligence for digital and computational pathology. Nature Reviews Bio-
engineering 1–20 (2023).
4. Bera, K., Schalper, K. A., Rimm, D. L., Velcheti, V. & Madabhushi, A. Artificial intelligence in digital
pathology—new tools for diagnosis and precision oncology. Nature reviews Clinical oncology 16, 703–
715 (2019).
5. Heinz, C. N., Echle, A., Foersch, S., Bychkov, A. & Kather, J. N. The future of artificial intelligence in
digital pathology–results of a survey across stakeholder groups. Histopathology 80, 1121–1127 (2022).
6. Cui, M. & Zhang, D. Y. Artificial intelligence and computational pathology. Laboratory Investigation
101, 412–422 (2021).
7. Abels, E. et al. Computational pathology definitions, best practices, and recommendations for regulatory
guidance: a white paper from the digital pathology association. The Journal of pathology 249, 286–294
(2019).
8. Waqas, A. et al. Revolutionizing digital pathology with the power of generative artificial intelligence and
foundation models. Laboratory Investigation 100255 (2023).
9. Lipkova, J. et al. Artificial intelligence for multimodal data integration in oncology. Cancer cell 40,
1095–1110 (2022).
10. Coudray, N. et al. Classification and mutation prediction from non–small cell lung cancer histopathology
images using deep learning. Nature medicine 24, 1559–1567 (2018).
11. Lu, M. Y. et al. Data-efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole-slide images.
Nature biomedical engineering 5, 555–570 (2021).
12. Bulten, W. et al. Automated deep-learning system for gleason grading of prostate cancer using biopsies:
a diagnostic study. The Lancet Oncology 21, 233–241 (2020).
13. Nagpal, K. et al. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for improving gleason scoring
of prostate cancer. NPJ digital medicine 2, 48 (2019).
14. Huang, S.-C. et al. Deep neural network trained on gigapixel images improves lymph node metastasis
detection in clinical settings. Nature communications 13, 3347 (2022).
15. Campanella, G. et al. Clinical-grade computational pathology using weakly supervised deep learning on
whole slide images. Nature medicine 25, 1301–1309 (2019).
16. Ehteshami Bejnordi, B. et al. Diagnostic Assessment of Deep Learning Algorithms for Detection of
Lymph Node Metastases in Women With Breast Cancer. JAMA 318, 2199–2210 (2017).
17. Beck, A. H. et al. Systematic analysis of breast cancer morphology uncovers stromal features associated
with survival. Science translational medicine 3 (2011).
18. Mobadersany, P. et al. Predicting cancer outcomes from histology and genomics using convolutional
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, E2970–E2979 (2018).
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
19. Chen, R. J. et al. Pan-cancer integrative histology-genomic analysis via multimodal deep learning. Can-
cer Cell 40, 865–878 (2022).
20. Lee, Y., Park, J., Oh, S. et al. Derivation of prognostic contextual histopathological features from whole-
slide images of tumours via graph deep learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng (2022).
21. Courtiol, P. et al. Deep learning-based classification of mesothelioma improves prediction of patient
outcome. Nature medicine 25, 1519–1525 (2019).
22. Lu, C. et al. A prognostic model for overall survival of patients with early-stage non-small cell lung
cancer: a multicentre, retrospective study. The Lancet Digital Health 2, e594–e606 (2020).
23. Amgad, M. et al. A population-level digital histologic biomarker for enhanced prognosis of invasive
breast cancer. Nature Medicine 1–13 (2023).
24. Boehm, K. M. et al. Multimodal data integration using machine learning improves risk stratification of
high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Nature cancer 3, 723–733 (2022).
25. Sammut, S.-J. et al. Multi-omic machine learning predictor of breast cancer therapy response. Nature
601, 623–629 (2022).
26. Vanguri, R. S. et al. Multimodal integration of radiology, pathology and genomics for prediction of
response to pd-(l) 1 blockade in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Nature cancer 3, 1151–1164
(2022).
27. Huang, Z. et al.
Artificial intelligence reveals features associated with breast cancer neoadjuvant
chemotherapy responses from multi-stain histopathologic images. NPJ Precision Oncology 7, 14 (2023).
28. Lu, M. Y. et al. Ai-based pathology predicts origins for cancers of unknown primary. Nature 594,
106–110 (2021).
29. Zhu, L. et al. An accurate prediction of the origin for bone metastatic cancer using deep learning on
digital pathological images. EBioMedicine 87 (2023).
30. Chen, C. et al. Fast and scalable search of whole-slide images via self-supervised deep learning. Nature
Biomedical Engineering 6, 1420–1434 (2022).
31. Kalra, S. et al. Yottixel–an image search engine for large archives of histopathology whole slide images.
Medical Image Analysis 65, 101757 (2020).
32. Hegde, N. et al. Similar image search for histopathology: Smily. NPJ digital medicine 2, 56 (2019).
33. Wang, X. et al. Retccl: clustering-guided contrastive learning for whole-slide image retrieval. Medical
image analysis 83, 102645 (2023).
34. Kather, J. N. et al. Pan-cancer image-based detection of clinically actionable genetic alterations. Nature
cancer 1, 789–799 (2020).
35. Fu, Y. et al. Pan-cancer computational histopathology reveals mutations, tumor composition and prog-
nosis. Nature cancer 1, 800–810 (2020).
36. Saldanha, O. L. et al. Self-supervised attention-based deep learning for pan-cancer mutation prediction
from histopathology. NPJ Precision Oncology 7, 35 (2023).
37. Wagner, S. J. et al. Transformer-based biomarker prediction from colorectal cancer histology: A large-
scale multicentric study. Cancer Cell 41, 1650–1661 (2023).
38. Yala, A. et al. Optimizing risk-based breast cancer screening policies with reinforcement learning. Nature
medicine 28, 136–143 (2022).
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
39. Zhou, Y. et al. Multi-site cross-organ calibrated deep learning (muscld): Automated diagnosis of non-
melanoma skin cancer. Medical image analysis 84, 102702 (2023).
40. Laleh, N. G. et al. Benchmarking weakly-supervised deep learning pipelines for whole slide classification
in computational pathology. Medical image analysis 79 (2022).
41. Graham, S. et al. Hover-net: Simultaneous segmentation and classification of nuclei in multi-tissue
histology images. Medical image analysis 58, 101563 (2019).
42. Graham, S. et al. One model is all you need: multi-task learning enables simultaneous histology image
segmentation and classification. Medical Image Analysis 83, 102685 (2023).
43. Caron, M. et al. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 9650–9660 (2021).
44. Oquab, M. et al.
Dinov2:
Learning robust visual features without supervision.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.07193 (2023).
45. He, K. et al. Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, 16000–16009 (2022).
46. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M. & Hinton, G. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual
representations. In International conference on machine learning, 1597–1607 (PMLR, 2020).
47. He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S. & Girshick, R. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representa-
tion learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
9729–9738 (2020).
48. Zhou, J. et al. Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (2021).
49. Chen, R. J. et al. A general-purpose self-supervised model for computational pathology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.15474 (2023).
50. Wang, X. et al. Transformer-based unsupervised contrastive learning for histopathological image classi-
fication. Medical image analysis 81, 102559 (2022).
51. Lai, J. et al.
Domain-specific optimization and diverse evaluation of self-supervised models for
histopathology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13259 (2023).
52. Vorontsov, E. et al.
Virchow: A million-slide digital pathology foundation model.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.07778 (2023).
53. Azizi, S. et al. Robust and data-efficient generalization of self-supervised machine learning for diagnostic
imaging. Nature Biomedical Engineering 1–24 (2023).
54. Campanella, G. et al. Computational pathology at health system scale–self-supervised foundation models
from three billion images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07033 (2023).
55. Kang, M., Song, H., Park, S., Yoo, D. & Pereira, S. Benchmarking self-supervised learning on diverse
pathology datasets. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 3344–3354 (2023).
56. Ciga, O., Xu, T. & Martel, A. L. Self supervised contrastive learning for digital histopathology. Machine
Learning with Applications 7, 100198 (2022).
57. Radford, A. et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International
conference on machine learning, 8748–8763 (PMLR, 2021).
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
58. Jia, C. et al. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 4904–4916 (PMLR, 2021).
59. Li, G., Duan, N., Fang, Y., Gong, M. & Jiang, D. Unicoder-vl: A universal encoder for vision and
language by cross-modal pre-training. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
vol. 34, 11336–11344 (2020).
60. Lu, J., Batra, D., Parikh, D. & Lee, S. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic representations
for vision-and-language tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
61. Chen, Y.-C. et al. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European conference on
computer vision, 104–120 (Springer, 2020).
62. Li, X. et al. Oscar: Object-semantics aligned pre-training for vision-language tasks. In Computer Vision–
ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXX 16,
121–137 (Springer, 2020).
63. Wang, J. et al. Git: A generative image-to-text transformer for vision and language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14100 (2022).
64. Zhang, P. et al. Vinvl: Revisiting visual representations in vision-language models. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 5579–5588 (2021).
65. Hu, X. et al.
Scaling up vision-language pre-training for image captioning.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 17980–17989 (2022).
66. Wang, W. et al. Image as a foreign language: Beit pretraining for all vision and vision-language tasks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10442 (2022).
67. Yu, J. et al.
Coca:
Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.01917 (2022).
68. Li, J., Li, D., Xiong, C. & Hoi, S. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-
language understanding and generation.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 12888–
12900 (PMLR, 2022).
69. Li, J. et al. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum distillation.
Advances in neural information processing systems 34, 9694–9705 (2021).
70. Schaumberg, A. J. et al. Interpretable multimodal deep learning for real-time pan-tissue pan-disease
pathology search on social media. Modern pathology 33, 2169–2185 (2020).
71. Schuhmann, C. et al. Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 25278–25294 (2022).
72. Zhang, Y., Jiang, H., Miura, Y., Manning, C. D. & Langlotz, C. P. Contrastive learning of medical visual
representations from paired images and text. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 2–25
(PMLR, 2022).
73. Pelka, O., Koitka, S., R¨uckert, J., Nensa, F. & Friedrich, C. M. Radiology objects in context (roco): a
multimodal image dataset. In Intravascular Imaging and Computer Assisted Stenting and Large-Scale
Annotation of Biomedical Data and Expert Label Synthesis: 7th Joint International Workshop, CVII-
STENT 2018 and Third International Workshop, LABELS 2018, Held in Conjunction with MICCAI 2018,
Granada, Spain, September 16, 2018, Proceedings 3, 180–189 (Springer, 2018).
74. Huang, Z., Bianchi, F., Yuksekgonul, M., Montine, T. & Zou, J. Leveraging medical twitter to build a
visual–language foundation model for pathology ai. bioRxiv 2023–03 (2023).
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
75. Zhang, S. et al.
Large-scale domain-specific pretraining for biomedical vision-language processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915 (2023).
76. Gamper, J. & Rajpoot, N. Multiple instance captioning: Learning representations from histopathology
textbooks and articles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 16549–16559 (2021).
77. Ikezogwo, W. O. et al.
Quilt-1m: One million image-text pairs for histopathology.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.11207 (2023).
78. Lin, W. et al. PMC-CLIP: Contrastive language-image pre-training using biomedical documents. In
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 525–536 (Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023). URL https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43993-3_51.
79. Lu, M. Y. et al. Towards a visual-language foundation model for computational pathology. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.12914 (2023).
80. Lu, M. Y. et al. Visual language pretrained multiple instance zero-shot transfer for histopathology images.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 19764–19775
(2023).
81. Tiu, E. et al.
Expert-level detection of pathologies from unannotated chest x-ray images via self-
supervised learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering 6, 1399–1406 (2022).
82. Huang, S.-C., Shen, L., Lungren, M. P. & Yeung, S. Gloria: A multimodal global-local representa-
tion learning framework for label-efficient medical image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 3942–3951 (2021).
83. Boecking, B. et al. Making the most of text semantics to improve biomedical vision–language processing.
In European conference on computer vision, 1–21 (Springer, 2022).
84. Eslami, S., de Melo, G. & Meinel, C. Does clip benefit visual question answering in the medical domain
as much as it does in the general domain? arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13906 (2021).
85. Zhang, H. et al.
Pathnarratives: Data annotation for pathological human-ai collaborative diagnosis.
Frontiers in Medicine 9, 1070072 (2023).
86. Tsuneki, M. & Kanavati, F.
Inference of captions from histopathological patches.
In International
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 1235–1250 (PMLR, 2022).
87. Zhang, R., Weber, C., Grossman, R. & Khan, A. A. Evaluating and interpreting caption prediction for
histopathology images. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 418–435 (PMLR, 2020).
88. Naseem, U., Khushi, M. & Kim, J. Vision-language transformer for interpretable pathology visual ques-
tion answering. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 27, 1681–1690 (2022).
89. He, X. Towards visual question answering on pathology images. In Proceedings of the 59th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics and the 11th international joint conference on
natural language processing, vol. 2 (2021).
90. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention Is All You Need. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
(2017).
91. Radford, A., Narasimhan, K., Salimans, T., Sutskever, I. et al. Improving language understanding by
generative pre-training (2018).
92. Radford, A. et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1, 9 (2019).
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
93. Brown, T. et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems 33, 1877–1901 (2020).
94. Hoffmann, J. et al. An empirical analysis of compute-optimal large language model training. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 30016–30030 (2022).
95. Wei, J. et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research
(2022).
96. Ouyang, L. et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 27730–27744 (2022).
97. Touvron, H. et al.
Llama:
Open and efficient foundation language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
98. Touvron, H. et al.
Llama 2:
Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
99. Raffel, C. et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research 21, 5485–5551 (2020).
100. Zhao, W. X. et al. A survey of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 (2023).
101. Chowdhery, A. et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311
(2022).
102. Anil, R. et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403 (2023).
103. Moor, M. et al. Med-flamingo: a multimodal medical few-shot learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15189
(2023).
104. Li, C. et al. Multimodal foundation models: From specialists to general-purpose assistants. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.10020 (2023).
105. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q. & Lee, Y. J. Visual instruction tuning. In NeurIPS (2023).
106. Alayrac, J.-B. et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35, 23716–23736 (2022).
107. Moor, M. et al. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelligence. Nature 616, 259–265
(2023).
108. Bubeck, S. et al. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12712 (2023).
109. Alsentzer, E. et al. Publicly available clinical bert embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2nd Clinical
Natural Language Processing Workshop, 72–78 (2019).
110. Singhal, K. et al. Towards expert-level medical question answering with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.09617 (2023).
111. Tu, T. et al. Towards generalist biomedical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14334 (2023).
112. Jiang, L. Y. et al. Health system-scale language models are all-purpose prediction engines. Nature 1–6
(2023).
113. Ayers, J. W. et al. Comparing physician and artificial intelligence chatbot responses to patient questions
posted to a public social media forum. JAMA internal medicine (2023).
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
114. Nori, H. et al. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in
medicine (2023). arXiv:2311.16452.
115. Nori, H., King, N., McKinney, S. M., Carignan, D. & Horvitz, E. Capabilities of gpt-4 on medical
challenge problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13375 (2023).
116. Buckley, T., Diao, J. A., Rodman, A. & Manrai, A. K. Accuracy of a vision-language model on challeng-
ing medical cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05591 (2023).
117. Sun, Y. et al. Pathasst: Redefining pathology through generative foundation ai assistant for pathology.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15072 (2023).
118. Li, C. et al. Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.00890 (2023).
119. Wu, C. et al. Can gpt-4v (ision) serve medical applications? case studies on gpt-4v for multimodal
medical diagnosis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09909 (2023).
120. Oon, M. L., Syn, N. L., Tan, C. L., Tan, K.-B. & Ng, S.-B. Bridging bytes and biopsies: A comparative
analysis of chatgpt and histopathologists in pathology diagnosis and collaborative potential. Histopathol-
ogy (2023).
121. Singhal, K. et al. Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620, 172–180 (2023).
122. Lin, T.-Y. et al. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th
European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13, 740–755
(Springer, 2014).
123. Liu, H., Li, C., Li, Y. & Lee, Y. J. Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03744 (2023).
124. Chiang, W.-L. et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality (2023).
URL https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
125. Zeng, Y. et al. What matters in training a gpt4-style language model with multimodal inputs?
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.02469 (2023).
126. Jaegle, A. et al. Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention. In International conference on
machine learning, 4651–4664 (PMLR, 2021).
47
