
===== PAGE 1 =====
Provable Guarantees for Self-Supervised Deep Learning
with Spectral Contrastive Loss
Jeff Z. HaoChen1
Colin Wei1
Adrien Gaidon2
Tengyu Ma1
1 Stanford University
2 Toyota Research Institute
{jhaochen, colinwei, tengyuma}@stanford.edu
adrien.gaidon@tri.global
Abstract
Recent works in self-supervised learning have advanced the state-of-the-art by relying on the contrastive
learning paradigm, which learns representations by pushing positive pairs, or similar examples from the
same class, closer together while keeping negative pairs far apart. Despite the empirical successes, theoretical
foundations are limited – prior analyses assume conditional independence of the positive pairs given the same
class label, but recent empirical applications use heavily correlated positive pairs (i.e., data augmentations
of the same image). Our work analyzes contrastive learning without assuming conditional independence
of positive pairs using a novel concept of the augmentation graph on data. Edges in this graph connect
augmentations of the same datapoint, and ground-truth classes naturally form connected sub-graphs. We
propose a loss that performs spectral decomposition on the population augmentation graph and can be
succinctly written as a contrastive learning objective on neural net representations. Minimizing this objective
leads to features with provable accuracy guarantees under linear probe evaluation. By standard generalization
bounds, these accuracy guarantees also hold when minimizing the training contrastive loss. Empirically, the
features learned by our objective can match or outperform several strong baselines on benchmark vision
datasets. In all, this work provides the ﬁrst provable analysis for contrastive learning where guarantees for
linear probe evaluation can apply to realistic empirical settings.
1
Introduction
Recent empirical breakthroughs have demonstrated the effectiveness of self-supervised learn-
ing, which trains representations on unlabeled data with surrogate losses and self-deﬁned supervi-
sion signals (Bachman et al., 2019, Bardes et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2020, Chen and He, 2020, Henaff,
2020, Hjelm et al., 2018, Misra and Maaten, 2020, Oord et al., 2018, Tian et al., 2019, 2020a, Wu et al.,
2018, Ye et al., 2019, Zbontar et al., 2021). Self-supervision signals in computer vision are often
deﬁned by using data augmentation to produce multiple views of the same image. For example,
the recent contrastive learning objectives (Arora et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2020a,b,c, He et al., 2020)
encourage closer representations for augmentations/views of the same natural datapoint than for
randomly sampled pairs of data.
Despite the empirical successes, there is a limited theoretical understanding of why self-
supervised losses learn representations that can be adapted to downstream tasks, for example,
using linear heads. Recent mathematical analyses for contrastive learning by Arora et al. (2019),
Tosh et al. (2020, 2021) provide guarantees under the assumption that two views are somewhat
conditionally independent given the label or a hidden variable. However, in practical algorithms
1
arXiv:2106.04156v7  [cs.LG]  24 Jun 2022

===== PAGE 2 =====
for computer vision applications, the two views are augmentations of a natural image and usually
exhibit a strong correlation that is difﬁcult to be de-correlated by conditioning. They are not inde-
pendent conditioned on the label, and we are only aware that they are conditionally independent
given the natural image, which is too complex to serve as a hidden variable with which prior works
can be meaningfully applied. Thus the existing theory does not appear to explain the practical suc-
cess of self-supervised learning.
This paper presents a theoretical framework for self-supervised learning without requiring
conditional independence. We design a principled, practical loss function for learning neural net
representations that resembles state-of-the-art contrastive learning methods. We prove that, under
a simple and realistic data assumption, linear classiﬁcation using representations learned on a poly-
nomial number of unlabeled data samples can recover the ground-truth labels of the data with high
accuracy.
The fundamental data property that we leverage is a notion of continuity of the population data
within the same class. Though a random pair of images from the same class can be far apart, the
pair is often connected by (many) sequences of natural images, where consecutive images in the
sequences are close neighbors within the same class. As shown in Figure 1 (images on the left
top part), two very different French bulldogs can be connected by a sequence of French bulldogs
(which may not be in the training set but are in the support of the population distribution). Prior
work (Wei et al., 2020) empirically demonstrates this type of connectivity property and uses it in
the analysis of pseudolabeling algorithms. This property is more salient when the neighborhood
of an example includes many different types of augmentations.
More formally, we deﬁne the population augmentation graph, whose vertices are all the aug-
mented data in the population distribution, which can be an exponentially large or inﬁnite set. Two
vertices are connected with an edge if they are augmentations of the same natural example. Our
main assumption is that for some proper m ∈Z+, we cannot partition the graph into m + 1 sub-
graphs between which there are few connections (Assumption 3.5). In other words, this intuitively
states that there are at most m clusters in the population augmentation graph. This assumption can
be seen as a graph-theoretic version of the continuity assumption on the population distribution. We
also assume that there are very few edges across different ground-truth classes (Assumption 3.6).
Figure 1 (left) illustrates a realistic scenario where dog and cat are the ground-truth categories,
between which edges are very rare. Each breed forms a sub-graph that has sufﬁcient inner connec-
tivity and thus cannot be further partitioned.
Our assumption fundamentally does not require independence of the two views (the posi-
tive pairs) conditioned on the class and can allow disconnected sub-graphs within a class. The
classes in the downstream task can be also somewhat ﬂexible as long as they are disconnected in
the augmentation graph. For example, when the augmentation graph consists of m disconnected
sub-graphs corresponding to ﬁne-grained classes, our assumptions allow the downstream task to
have any r ≤m coarse-grained classes containing these ﬁne-grained classes as a sub-partition.
Prior work (Wei et al., 2020) on pseudolabeling algorithms essentially requires an exact alignment
between sub-graphs and downstream classes (i.e., r = m). They face this limitation because their
analysis requires ﬁtting discrete pseudolabels on the unlabeled data. We avoid this difﬁculty be-
cause we consider directly learning continuous representations on the unlabeled data.
The main insight of the paper is that contrastive learning can be viewed as a parametric form
of spectral clustering (Ng et al., 2001, Shi and Malik, 2000) on the augmentation graph. Concretely,
suppose we apply spectral decomposition or spectral clustering—a classical approach for graph
partitioning—to the adjacency matrix deﬁned on the population augmentation graph. We form a
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Figure 1: Left: demonstration of the population augmentation graph. Two augmented data are
connected if they are views of the same natural datapoint. Augmentations of data from different
classes in the downstream tasks are assumed to be nearly disconnected, whereas there are more
connections within the same class. We allow the existence of disconnected sub-graphs within a
class corresponding to potential sub-classes. Right: decomposition of the learned representations.
The representations (rows in the RHS) learned by minimizing the population spectral contrastive
loss can be decomposed as the LHS. The scalar sxi is positive for every augmented datapoint xi.
Columns of the matrix labeled “eigenvectors” are the top eigenvectors of the normalized adjacency
matrix of the augmentation graph deﬁned in Section 3.1. The operator ⊙multiplies row-wise each
sxi with the xi-th row of the eigenvector matrix. When classes (or sub-classes) are exactly dis-
connected in the augmentation graph, the eigenvectors are sparse and align with the sub-class
structure. The invertible Q matrix does not affect the performance of the rows under the linear
probe.
matrix where the top-k eigenvectors are the columns and interpret each row of the matrix as the
representation (in Rk) of an example. Somewhat surprisingly, we prove that this feature extractor
can be also recovered (up to some linear transformation) by minimizing the following population
objective which is a variant of the standard contrastive loss:
L(f) = −2 · Ex,x+
h
f(x)⊤f(x+)
i
+ Ex,x− 
f(x)⊤f(x−)
2 
,
where (x, x+) is a pair of augmentations of the same datapoint, (x, x−) is a pair of independently
random augmented data, and f is a parameterized function from augmented data to Rk. Figure 1
(right) illustrates the relationship between the eigenvector matrix and the learned representations.
We call this loss the population spectral contrastive loss.
We analyze the linear classiﬁcation performance of the representations learned by minimiz-
ing the population spectral contrastive loss. Our main result (Theorem 3.8) shows that when the
representation dimension exceeds the maximum number of disconnected sub-graphs, linear clas-
siﬁcation with learned representations is guaranteed to have a small error. Our theorem reveals a
trend that a larger representation dimension is needed when there are a larger number of discon-
nected sub-graphs. Our analysis relies on novel techniques tailored to linear probe performance,
which have not been studied in the spectral graph theory community to the best of our knowledge.
The spectral contrastive loss also works on empirical data. Since our approach optimizes para-
metric loss functions, guarantees involving the population loss can be converted to ﬁnite sample
results using off-the-shelf generalization bounds. The end-to-end result (Theorem 4.3) shows that
the number of unlabeled examples required is polynomial in the Rademacher complexity of the
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
model family and other relevant parameters, whereas the number of downstream labeled examples
only needs to be linear in the representation dimension (which needs to be linear in the number of
clusters in the graph). This demonstrates that contrastive learning reduces the amount of labeled
examples needed.
In summary, our main theoretical contributions are: 1) we propose a simple contrastive loss
motivated by spectral decomposition of the population data graph, 2) under simple and realis-
tic assumptions, we provide downstream classiﬁcation guarantees for the representation learned
by minimizing this loss on population data, and 3) our analysis is easily applicable to deep net-
works with polynomial unlabeled samples via off-the-shelf generalization bounds. Our theoretical
framework can be viewed as containing two stages: we ﬁrst analyze the population loss and the
representation that minimizes it (Section 3), then study the empirical loss where the representation
is learned with a neural network with bounded capacity (Section 4).
In addition, we implement and test the proposed spectral contrastive loss on standard vision
benchmark datasets. Our algorithm is simple and doesn’t rely on tricks such as stop-gradient
which is essential to SimSiam (Chen and He, 2020). We demonstrate that the features learned by
our algorithm can match or outperform several strong baselines (Chen et al., 2020a, Chen and He,
2020, Chen et al., 2020c, Grill et al., 2020) when evaluated using a linear probe.
2
Additional related works
Empirical works on self-supervised learning.
Self-supervised learning algorithms have been
shown to successfully learn representations that beneﬁt downstream tasks (Bachman et al., 2019,
Bardes et al., 2021, Caron et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2020a,b,c, He et al., 2020, Henaff, 2020, Hjelm
et al., 2018, Misra and Maaten, 2020, Oord et al., 2018, Tian et al., 2019, 2020a, Wu et al., 2018, Xie
et al., 2019, Ye et al., 2019, Zbontar et al., 2021). Many recent self-supervised learning algorithms
learn features with siamese networks (Bromley et al., 1993), where two neural networks of shared
weights are applied to pairs of augmented data. Introducing asymmetry to siamese networks either
with a momentum encoder like BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) or by stopping gradient propagation for
one branch of the siamese network like SimSiam (Chen and He, 2020) has been shown to effectively
avoid collapsing. Contrastive methods (Chen et al., 2020a,c, He et al., 2020) minimize the InfoNCE
loss (Oord et al., 2018), where two views of the same data are attracted while views from different
data are repulsed.
Theoretical works on self-supervised learning. As brieﬂy discussed in the introduction, several
theoretical works have studied self-supervised learning. Arora et al. (2019) provide guarantees
for representations learned by contrastive learning on downstream linear classiﬁcation tasks under
the assumption that the positive pairs are conditionally independent given the class label. Theo-
rem 3.3 and Theorem 3.7 of the work of Lee et al. (2020) show that, under conditional independence
given the label and/or additional latent variables, representations learned by reconstruction-based
self-supervised learning algorithms can achieve small errors in the downstream linear classiﬁca-
tion task. Lee et al. (2020, Theorem 4.1) generalizes it to approximate conditional independence for
Gaussian data and Theorem 4.5 further weakens the assumptions signiﬁcantly. Tosh et al. (2020)
show that contrastive learning representations can linearly recover any continuous functions of the
underlying topic posterior under a topic modeling assumption (which also requires conditional in-
dependence of the positive pair given the hidden variable). More recently, Theorem 11 of the work
of Tosh et al. (2021) provide novel guarantees for contrastive learning under the assumption that
there exists a hidden variable h such that the positive pair (x, x+) are conditionally independent
given h and the random variable p(x|h)p(x+|h)/p(x)p(x+) has a small variance. However, in prac-
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
tical algorithms for computer vision applications, the two views are two augmentations and thus
they are highly correlated. They might be only independent when conditioned on very complex
hidden variables such as the original natural image, which might be too complex for the previous
results to be meaningfully applied.
We can also compare the assumptions and results on a concrete generative model for the data,
our Example 3.10 in Section 3.4, where the data are generated by a mixture of Gaussian or a mix-
ture of manifolds, the label is the index of the mixture, and the augmentations are small Gaussian
blurring (i.e., adding Gaussian noise). In this case, the positive pairs (x, x+) are two points that are
very close to each other. To the best of our knowledge, applying Theorem 11 of Tosh et al. (2021) to
this case with h = ¯x (the natural datapoint) would result in requiring a large (if not inﬁnite) repre-
sentation dimension. Because x+ and x are very close, the reconstruction-based algorithms in Lee
et al. (2020), when used to predict x+ from x, will not be able to produce good representations as
well.1
On a technical level, to relate prior works’ assumptions to ours, we can consider an almost
equivalent version of our assumption (although our proofs do not directly rely on or relate to the
discussion below). Let (x, x+) be a positive pair and let p(·|x) be the conditional distribution of
x+ given x. Starting from x0, let us consider a hypothetical Markov chain x0, . . . , xT , · · · where xt
is drawn from p(·|xt−1). Our assumption essentially means that this hypothetical Markov chain of
sampling neighbors will mix within the same class earlier than it mixes across the entire population
(which might not be possible or takes exponential time). More concretely, the assumption that
ρ⌊k/2⌋is large compared to α in Theorem 3.8 is roughly equivalent to the existence of a (potentially
large) T such that x0 and xT are still likely to have the same label, but are sufﬁciently independent
conditioned on this label or some hidden variable. Roughly speaking, prior works (Arora et al.,
2019, Tosh et al., 2020, 2021) assume probabilistic structure about x0 and x1 (instead of x0 and xT ),
e.g., Arora et al. (2019) and Theorem 11 of Tosh et al. (2021) assume that x0 and x1 are independent
conditioned on the label and/or a hidden variable. Similar Markov chains on augmentated data
have also been used in previous work (Dao et al., 2019) to study properties of data augmentation.
Several other works (Bansal et al., 2020, Mitrovic et al., 2020, Tian et al., 2020b, Tsai et al., 2020,
Wang and Isola, 2020) also theoretically study self-supervised learning. The work Tsai et al. (2020)
prove that self-supervised learning methods can extract task-relevant information and discard task-
irrelevant information, but lacks guarantees for solving downstream tasks efﬁciently with simple
(e.g., linear) models. Tian et al. (2020b) study why non-contrastive self-supervised learning meth-
ods can avoid feature collapse. Zimmermann et al. (2021) prove that for a speciﬁc data generating
process, contrastvie learning can learn representations that recover the latent variable. Cai et al.
(2021) analyze domain adaptation algorithms for subpopulation shift with a similar expansion con-
dition as (Wei et al., 2020) while also allowing disconnected parts within each class, but require
access to ground-truth labels during training. In contrast, our algorithm doesn’t need labels during
pre-training.
Co-training and multi-view learning are related settings which leverage two distinct “views”
(i.e., feature subsets) of the data (Balcan et al., 2005, Blum and Mitchell, 1998, Dasgupta et al., 2002).
The original co-training algorithms (Blum and Mitchell, 1998, Dasgupta et al., 2002) assume that
the two views are independent conditioned on the true label and leverage this independence to
obtain accurate pseudolabels for the unlabeled data. Balcan et al. (2005) relax the requirement on
independent views of co-training, by using an “expansion” assumption, which is closely related
1On a technical level, Example 3.10 does not satisfy the requirement regarding the β quantity in Assumption 4.1 of Lee
et al. (2020), if (X1, X2) in that paper is equal to (x, x+) here—it requires the label to be correlated with the raw input x,
which is not necessarily true in Example 3.10. This can likely be addressed by using a different X2.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
to our assumption that ρ⌊k/2⌋is not too small in Theorem 3.8. Besides recent works (e.g., the work
of Tosh et al. (2021)), most co-training or multi-view learning algorithms are quite different from
the modern contrastive learning algorithms which use neural network parameterization for vision
applications.
Our analysis relies on the normalized adjacency matrix (see Section 3.1), which is closely re-
lated to the graph Laplacian regularization that has been studied in the setting of semi-supervised
learning (Nadler et al., 2009, Zhu et al., 2003). In their works, the Laplacian matrix is used to deﬁne
a regularization term that smooths the predictions on unlabeled data. This regularizer is further
added to the supervised loss on labeled data during training. In contrast, we use the normalized
adjacency matrix to deﬁne the unsupervised training objective in this paper.
3
Spectral contrastive learning on population data
In this section, we introduce our theoretical framework, the spectral contrastive loss, and the
main analysis of the performance of the representations learned on population data.
We use X to denote the set of all natural data (raw inputs without augmentation). We assume
that each ¯x ∈X belongs to one of r classes, and let y : X →[r] denote the ground-truth (determin-
istic) labeling function. Let PX be the population distribution over X from which we draw training
data and test our ﬁnal performance. In the main body of the paper, for the ease of exposition, we
assume X to be a ﬁnite but exponentially large set (e.g., all real vectors in Rd with bounded pre-
cision). This allows us to use sums instead of integrals and avoid non-essential nuances/jargons
related to functional analysis. See Section F for the straightforward extensions to the case where X
is an inﬁnite compact set (with mild regularity conditions).2
We next formulate data augmentations. Given a natural data sample ¯x ∈X, we use A(·|¯x)
to denote the distribution of its augmentations. For instance, when ¯x represents an image, A(·|¯x)
can be the distribution of common augmentations (Chen et al., 2020a) that includes Gaussian blur,
color distortion and random cropping. We use X to denote the set of all augmented data, which
is the union of supports of all A(·|¯x) for ¯x ∈X. As with X, we also assume that X is a ﬁnite but
exponentially large set, and denote N = |X|. None of the bounds will depend on N — it is only
deﬁned and assumed to be ﬁnite for the ease of exposition.
We will learn an embedding function f : X →Rk, and then evaluate its quality by the mini-
mum error achieved with a linear probe. Concretely, a linear classiﬁer has weights B ∈Rk×r and
predicts gf,B(x) = arg maxi∈[r](f(x)⊤B)i for an augmented datapoint x (arg max breaks tie arbitrar-
ily). Then, given a natural data sample ¯x, we ensemble the predictions on augmented data and
predict:
¯gf,B(¯x) := arg max
i∈[r]
Pr
x∼A(·|¯x) [gf,B(x) = i] .
We denote the error of the representation and the linear head as:
E(f, B) :=
Pr
¯x∼PX
[y(¯x) ̸= ¯gf,B(¯x)].
Deﬁne the linear probe error as the error of the best possible linear classiﬁer on the representations:
E(f) :=
min
B∈Rk×r E(f, B) =
min
B∈Rk×r Pr
¯x∼PX
[y(¯x) ̸= ¯gf,B(¯x)].
(1)
2In Section F, we will deal with an inﬁnite graph, its adjacency operator (instead of adjacency matrix), and the
eigenfunctions of the adjacency operator (instead of eigenvectors) essentially in the same way.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
3.1
Augmentation graph and spectral decomposition
Our approach is based on the central concept of population augmentation graph, denoted by
G(X, w), where the vertex set is all augmentation data X and w denotes the edge weights deﬁned
below. For any two augmented data x, x′ ∈X, deﬁne the weight wxx′ as the marginal probability
of generating the pair x and x′ from a random natural data ¯x ∼PX :
wxx′ := E¯x∼PX

A(x|¯x)A(x′|¯x)

(2)
Therefore, the weights sum to 1 because the total probability mass is 1: P
x,x′∈X wxx′ = 1. The
relative magnitude intuitively captures the closeness between x and x′ with respect to the aug-
mentation transformation. For most of the unrelated x and x′, the value wxx′ will be signiﬁcantly
smaller than the average value. For example, when x and x′ are random croppings of a cat and a
dog respectively, wxx′ will be essentially zero because no natural data can be augmented into both
x and x′. On the other hand, when x and x′ are very close in ℓ2-distance or very close in ℓ2-distance
up to color distortion, wxx′ is nonzero because they may be augmentations of the same image with
Gaussian blur and color distortion. We say that x and x′ are connected with an edge if wxx′ > 0.
See Figure 1 (left) for more illustrations.
We emphasize that we only work with the population graph rather than the empirical graph
(i.e., the corresponding graph constructed with the empirical dataset as the vertex set). The popula-
tion graph is very sparse but not empty—many similar images exist in the population. In contrast,
the empirical graph would be nearly empty, since two images in the empirical dataset almost never
share the same augmentation image. Our analysis will apply to minimizing contrastive loss on
an empirical dataset (see Section 4), but not via analyzing the property of the empirical graph. In-
stead, we will show that contrastive learning on empirical data with parametrized models is similar
to decomposing the population graph (see technical discussions in Section 5). This is a key differ-
ence between our work and classical spectral clustering work—we only require properties of the
population graph rather than the empirical graph.
A simpliﬁed running example with Gaussian perturbation augmentation. Suppose the natural
data is supported on manifolds in Euclidean space, and the data augmentation is adding random
noise sampled from N(0, σ2 · Id×d) where σ is a small quantity (e.g., the norm of the perturbation
σ
√
d should be much smaller than the norm of the original datapoint). Then the edge between two
augmented datapoints would be have near zero weight unless the two datapoints have small ℓ2
distance. Hence, the resulting graph is essentially the ϵ-ball proximity graph (Zemel and Carreira-
Perpiñán, 2004) or geometric graph (Penrose, 2003) in Euclidean space.
Given the structure of the population augmentation graph, we apply spectral decomposition
to the population graph to construct principled embeddings. The eigenvalue problems are closely
related to graph partitioning as shown in spectral graph theory (Chung and Graham, 1997) for
both worst-case graphs (Cheeger, 1969, Kannan et al., 2004, Lee et al., 2014, Louis et al., 2011) and
random graphs (Abbe, 2017, Lei et al., 2015, McSherry, 2001). In machine learning, spectral clus-
tering (Ng et al., 2001, Shi and Malik, 2000) is a classical algorithm that learns embeddings by
eigendecomposition on an empirical distance graph and invoking k-means on the embeddings.
We will apply eigendecomposition to the population augmentation graph (and then later use
linear probe for classiﬁcation). Let wx = P
x′∈X wxx′ be the total weights associated to x, which is
often viewed as an analog of the degree of x in weighted graph. A central object in spectral graph
theory is the so-called normalized adjacency matrix:
A := D−1/2AD−1/2
(3)
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
where A ∈RN×N is adjacency matrix with entires Axx′ = wxx′ and D ∈RN×N is a diagonal matrix
with Dxx = wx.3
Standard spectral graph theory approaches produce vertex embeddings as follows.
Let
γ1, γ2, · · · , γk be the k largest eigenvalues of A, and v1, v2, · · · , vk be the corresponding unit-norm
eigenvectors. Let F ∗= [v1, v2, · · · , vk] ∈RN×k be the matrix that collects these eigenvectors in
columns, and we refer to it as the eigenvector matrix. Let u∗
x ∈Rk be the x-th row of the matrix
F ∗. It turns out that u∗
x’s can serve as desirable embeddings of x’s because they exhibit clustering
structure in Euclidean space that resembles the clustering structure of the graph G(X, w).
3.2
From spectral decomposition to spectral contrastive learning
The embeddings u∗
x obtained by eigendecomposition are nonparametric—a k-dimensional pa-
rameter is needed for every x—and therefore cannot be learned with a realistic amount of data. The
embedding matrix F ∗cannot be even stored efﬁciently. Therefore, we will instead parameterize the
rows of the eigenvector matrix F ∗as a neural net function, and assume embeddings u∗
x can be rep-
resented by f(x) for some f ∈F, where F is the hypothesis class containing neural networks. As
we’ll show in Section 4, this allows us to leverage the extrapolation power of neural networks and
learn the representation on a ﬁnite dataset.
Next, we design a proper loss function for the feature extractor f, such that minimizing this
loss could recover F ∗up to some linear transformation. As we will show in Section 4, the resulting
population loss function on f also admits an unbiased estimator with ﬁnite training samples. Let
F be an embedding matrix with ux on the x-th row, we will ﬁrst design a loss function of F that
can be decomposed into parts about individual rows of F.
We employ the following matrix factorization based formulation for eigenvectors. Consider
the objective
min
F∈RN×k Lmf(F) :=
A −FF ⊤
2
F .
(4)
By the classical theory on low-rank approximation (Eckart–Young–Mirsky theorem (Eckart
and Young, 1936)), any minimizer bF of Lmf(F) contains scaling of the largest eigenvectors of
A up to a right transformation—for some orthonormal matrix R ∈Rk×k, we have bF = F ∗·
diag([√γ1, . . . , √γk])R. Fortunately, multiplying the embedding matrix by any matrix on the right
and any diagonal matrix on the left does not change its linear probe performance, which is formal-
ized by the following lemma.
Lemma 3.1. Consider an embedding matrix F ∈RN×k and a linear classiﬁer B ∈Rk×r. Let D ∈RN×N
be a diagonal matrix with positive diagonal entries and Q ∈Rk×k be an invertible matrix. Then, for any
embedding matrix eF = D · F · Q, the linear classiﬁer ˜B = Q−1B on eF has the same prediction as B on F.
As a consequence, we have
E(F) = E( eF).
(5)
where E(F) denotes the linear probe performance when the rows of F are used as embeddings.
Proof of Lemma 3.1. Let D = diag(s) where sx > 0 for x ∈X. Let ux, ˜ux ∈Rk be the x-th row of
matrices F and eF, respectively. Recall that gu,B(x) = arg maxi∈[r](u⊤
x B)i is the prediction on an
augmented datapoint x ∈X with representation ux and linear classiﬁer B. Let eB = Q−1B, it’s easy
3We index the matrix A, D by (x, x′) ∈X × X. Generally we index N-dimensional axis by x ∈X.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
to see that g˜u, eB(x) = arg maxi∈[r](sx · u⊤
x B)i. Notice that sx > 0 doesn’t change the prediction since
it changes all dimensions of u⊤
x B by the same scale, we have g˜u, eB(x) = gu,B(x) for any augmented
datapoint x ∈X. The equivalence of loss naturally follows.
The main beneﬁt of objective Lmf(F) is that it’s based on the rows of F. Recall that vectors ux
are the rows of F. Each entry of FF ⊤is of the form u⊤
x ux′, and thus Lmf(F) can be decomposed
into a sum of N2 terms involving terms u⊤
x ux′. Interestingly, if we reparameterize each row ux
by w1/2
x
f(x), we obtain a very similar loss function for f that resembles the contrastive learning
loss used in practice (Chen et al., 2020a) as shown below in Lemma 3.2. See Figure 1 (right) for an
illustration of the relationship between the eigenvector matrix and the representations learned by
minimizing this loss.
We formally deﬁne the positive and negative pairs to introduce the loss. Let ¯x ∼PX be a
random natural datapoint and draw x ∼A(·|¯x) and x+ ∼A(·|¯x) independently to form a positive
pair (x, x+). Draw ¯x′ ∼PX and x−∼A(·|¯x′) independently with ¯x, x, x+. We call (x, x−) a negative
pair.4
Lemma 3.2 (Spectral contrastive loss). Recall that ux is the x-th row of F. Let ux = w1/2
x
f(x) for some
function f. Then, the loss function Lmf(F) is equivalent to the following loss function for f, called spectral
contrastive loss, up to an additive constant:
Lmf(F) = L(f) + const
where L(f) ≜−2 · Ex,x+
f(x)⊤f(x+)

+ Ex,x−

f(x)⊤f(x−)
2
(6)
Proof of Lemma 3.2. We can expand Lmf(F) and obtain
Lmf(F) =
X
x,x′∈X

wxx′
√wxwx′ −u⊤
x ux′
2
=
X
x,x′∈X
 w2
xx′
wxwx′ −2 · wxx′ · f(x)⊤f(x′) + wxwx′ ·

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
(7)
Notice that the ﬁrst term is a constant that only depends on the graph but not the variable f.
By the deﬁnition of augmentation graph, wxx′ is the probability of a random positive pair being
(x, x′) while wx is the probability of a random augmented datapoint being x. We can hence rewrite
the sum of last two terms in Equation (7) as Equation (6).
We note that spectral contrastive loss is similar to many popular contrastive losses (Chen et al.,
2020a, Oord et al., 2018, Sohn, 2016, Wu et al., 2018). For instance, the contrastive loss in Sim-
CLR (Chen et al., 2020a) can be rewritten as (with simple algebraic manipulation)
−f(x)⊤f(x+) + log
 
exp

f(x)⊤f(x+)

+
n
X
i=1
exp

f(x)⊤f(xi)
!
.
Here x and x+ are a positive pair and x1, · · · , xn are augmentations of other data. Spectral
contrastive loss can be seen as removing f(x)⊤f(x+) from the second term, and replacing the log
sum of exponential terms with the average of the squares of f(x)⊤f(xi). We will show in Section 6
that our loss has a similar empirical performance as SimCLR without requiring a large batch size.
4Though x and x−are simply two independent draws, we call them negative pairs following the literature (Arora et al.,
2019).
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
3.3
Theoretical guarantees for spectral contrastive loss on population data
In this section, we introduce the main assumptions on the data and state our main theoretical
guarantee for spectral contrastive learning on population data.
To formalize the idea that G cannot be partitioned into too many disconnected sub-graphs, we
introduce the notions of Dirichlet conductance and sparsest m-partition, which are standard in spectral
graph theory. Dirichlet conductance represents the fraction of edges from S to its complement:
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Dirichlet conductance). For a graph G = (X, w) and a subset S ⊆X, we deﬁne the
Dirichlet conductance of S as
φG(S) :=
P
x∈S,x′ /∈S wxx′
P
x∈S wx
.
We note that when S is a singleton, there is φG(S) = 1 due to the deﬁnition of wx. For i ∈Z+,
we introduce the sparsest i-partition to represent the number of edges between i disjoint subsets.
Deﬁnition 3.4 (Sparsest i-partition). Let G = (X, w) be the augmentation graph. For an integer i ∈
[2, |X|], we deﬁne the sparsest i-partition as
ρi :=
min
S1,··· ,Si max{φG(S1), . . . , φG(Si)}
where S1, · · · , Si are non-empty sets that form a partition of X.
We note that ρi increases as i increases.5 When r is the number of underlying classes, we
might expect ρr ≈0 since the augmentations from different classes almost compose a disjoint r-
way partition of X. However, for i > r, we can expect ρi to be much larger. For instance, in the
extreme case when i = |X| = N, every set Sj is a singleton, which implies that ρN = 1. More
generally, as we will show later (Lemma 3.9), ρi can be expected to be at least inverse polynomial
in data dimension when i is larger than the number of underlying semantic classes in the data.
Assumption 3.5 (at most m clusters). We assume that ρm+1 ≥ρ. A prototypical case would be that there
are at most m clusters in the population augmentation graph, and each of them cannot be broken into two
subsets both with conductance less than ρ.
When there are m clusters that have sufﬁcient inner connections (corresponding to, e.g., m
semantically coherent subpopulations), we expect ρm+1 to be much larger than ρm because any
m + 1 partition needs to break one sub-graph into two pieces and incur a large conductance. In
other words, suppose the graph is consists of m clusters, the quantity ρ is characterizing the level
of internal connection within each cluster. Furthermore, in many cases we expect ρm+1 to be in-
verse polynomial in dimension. In the running example of Section 3.1 (where augmentation is
adding Gaussian noise), ρ is related to the Cheeger constant or the isoperimetric number of the
data manifolds, which in many cases is believed to be at least inverse polynomial in dimension
(e.g., see Bobkov et al. (1997) for the Cheeger constant of the Gaussian distribution.) Indeed, in
Section 3.4 we will formally lowerbound ρm+1 by the product of the augmentation strength and
the Cheeger constant of the subpopulation distributions (Proposition 3.9), and lowerbound the
5To see this, consider 3 ≤i ≤|X|. Let S1, · · · , Si be the partition of X that minimizes the RHS of Deﬁnition 3.4
Deﬁne set S′
i−1 := Si ∪Si−1. It is easy to see that φG(S′
i−1) =
P
x∈S′
i−1,x′ /
∈S′
i−1
wxx′
P
x∈S′
i−1
wx
≤
Pi
j=i−1
P
x∈Sj ,x′ /
∈Sj wxx′
Pi
j=i−1
P
x∈Sj wx
≤
max{φG(Si−1), φG(Si)}. Notice that S1, · · · , Si−2, S′
i−1 are i−1 non-empty sets that form a partition of X, by Deﬁnition 3.4
we have ρi−1 ≤max{φG(S1), · · · , φG(Si−2), φG(S′
i−1)} ≤max{φG(S1), · · · , φG(Si)} = ρi.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Cheeger constant by inverse polynomial for concrete settings where the data come from a mixture
of manifolds (Theorem 3.11).
Assumption 3.5 also implies properties of the graph spectrum. Recall that γi is the i-th largest
eigenvalue of the normalized adjacency matrix A and γ1 = 1. According to Cheeger’s inequality
(Lemma B.4), Assumption 3.5 implies that γ2m ≤1 −Ω(ρ2/ log m), which suggests that there is a
gap between γ1 and γ2m and will be useful in our analysis.
Next, we formalize the assumption that very few edges cross different ground-truth classes. It
turns out that it sufﬁces to assume that the labels are recoverable from the augmentations (which
is also equivalent to that two examples in different classes can rarely be augmented into the same
point).
Assumption 3.6 (Labels are recoverable from augmentations). Let ¯x ∼PX and y(¯x) be its label. Let
the augmentation x ∼A(·|¯x). We assume that there exists a classiﬁer g that can predict y(¯x) given x with
error at most α. That is, g(x) = y(¯x) with probability at least 1 −α.
A small α in Assumption 3.6 means that different classes are “separated” in the sense that
data from different classes have very few (at most O(α)) shared augmentations. Alternatively, one
can think of this assumption as assuming that the augmentation graph can be partitioned into r
clusters each corresponding to augmentations from one class, and there are at most O(α) edges
across the clusters. This is typically true for real-world image data like ImageNet, since for any
two images from different classes (e.g., images of a Husky and a Birman cat), using the typical data
augmentations such as adding noise and random cropping can rarely (with exponentially small
probability) lead to the same augmented image.
Typically, both ρ in Assumption 3.5 and α in Assumption 3.7 are small positive values that are
much less than 1. However, ρ can be much larger than α. Recall that ρ can be expected to be at
least inverse polynomial in dimension. In contrast, α characterizes the separation between classes
and are expected to be exponentially small in typical cases. For example, in the running example of
Section 3.1 with Gaussian perturbation augmentation, if σ
√
d is smaller than the minimum distance
between two subpopulations, we can rarely augment two datapoints from distinct subpopulations
into a shared augmentation, and therefore α is expected to exponentially small. Our analysis be-
low operates in the reasonable regime where ρ2 is larger than α, which intuitively means that the
internal connection within the cluster is bigger than the separation between the clusters.
We also introduce the following assumption which states that some minimizer of the popula-
tion spectral contrastive loss can be realized by the hypothesis class.
Assumption 3.7 (Expressivity of the hypothesis class). Let F be a hypothesis class containing functions
from X to Rk. We assume that at least one of the global minima of L(f) belongs to F.
Our main theorem bound from above the linear probe error of the feature learned by minimiz-
ing the population spectral contrastive loss. In Theorem 4.3 we extend this result to the case where
both the feature and the linear head are learned from empirical datasets.
Theorem 3.8 (Main theorem for inﬁnite/population pretraining data case). Assume the representa-
tion dimension k ≥2r and Assumption 3.6 holds for α > 0. Let F be a hypothesis class that satisﬁes
Assumption 3.7 and let f∗
pop ∈F be a minimizer of L(f). Then, we have
E(f∗
pop) ≤eO

α/ρ2
⌊k/2⌋

.
In particular, if Assumption 3.5 also holds and k > 2m, we have E(f∗
pop) ≤eO
 α/ρ2
.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Here we use eO(·) to hide universal constant factors and logarithmic factors in k. We note that
α = 0 when augmentations from different classes are perfectly disconnected in the augmentation
graph, in which case the above theorem guarantees the exact recovery of the ground truth. Gen-
erally, we expect α to be an extremely (exponentially) small constant independent of k, whereas
ρ⌊k/2⌋increases with k and can be at least inverse polynomial when k is reasonably large, hence
much larger than √α. We characterize the ρk’s growth on more concrete distributions in the next
subsection. When k > 2m, as argued below Assumption 3.6, we expect that α ≪ρ2 ≤ρ2
m+1 and
thus the error α/ρ2 is sufﬁciently small.
Previous works on graph partitioning (Arora et al., 2009, Lee et al., 2014, Leighton and Rao,
1999) often analyze the rounding algorithms that conduct clustering based on the representations
of unlabeled data and do not analyze the performance of linear probe (which has access to labeled
data). These results provide guarantees on the approximation ratio—the ratio between the conduc-
tance of the obtained partition to the best partition—which may depend on graph size (Arora et al.,
2009) that can be exponentially large in our setting. The approximation ratio guarantee does not
lead to a guarantee on the representations’ performance on downstream tasks. Our guarantees are
on the linear probe accuracy on the downstream tasks and independent of the graph size. We rely
on the formulation of the downstream task’s labeling function (Assumption 3.6) as well as a novel
analysis technique that characterizes the linear structure of the representations. In Section B, we
provide the proof of Theorem 3.8 as well as its more generalized version where k/2 is relaxed to be
any constant fraction of k. A proof sketch of Theorem 3.8 is given in Section 5.1.
3.4
Provable instantiation of Theorem 3.8 to mixture of manifold data
In this section, we exemplify Theorem 3.8 on examples where the natural data distribution is
a mixture of manifolds.
We ﬁrst show that in the running example given in Section 3.1, Assumption 3.5 holds for some
ρ that is closely related to the Cheeger constant of the data manifolds. Recall that the Cheeger
constant or isoperimetric number (Buser, 1982) of a distribution µ with density p over Rd is deﬁned
as
hµ := inf
S⊂Rd
R
∂S p(x)dx
min{
R
S p(x)dx,
R
Rd\S p(x)dx}.
(8)
Here the denominator is the smaller one of volumes of S and Rd\S, whereas the numerator is the
surface area of S. (See e.g.,(Chen, 2021) for the precise deﬁnition of the boundary measure ∂S.)
The following proposition (proved in Section C.1) shows that ρ scales linearly in the augmentation
strength and the Cheeger constant.
Proposition 3.9. Suppose the natural data distribution PX is a mixture of m distributions P1, · · · , Pm
supported on disjoint subsets of Rd, and the data augmentation is Gaussian perturbation sampled from
N(0, σ2 · Id×d). Then,
lim
σ→0+
ρm+1
σ
≳min
i∈[m] hPi
(9)
That is, ρm+1 is at least linear in the augmentation size σ and the Cheeger constants of subpopulations.
In many cases, the Cheeger constant is at least inverse polynomial in the data dimension (Chen,
2021, Lee and Vempala, 2016). When the manifolds Pi are spherical Gaussian with unit identity co-
variance, the Cheeger constant is Ω(1)(Bobkov et al., 1997), and thus the distribution PX in Proposi-
tion 3.9 satisﬁes Assumption 3.5 with ρ ≳σ. Furthermore, when the distribution is transformed by
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
a function with Lipschitzness κ > 0, the Cheeger constant changes by a factor at most κ. Therefore,
Proposition 3.9 also applies to a mixture of manifolds setting deﬁned below.
In the rest of this section, we instantiate Theorem 3.8 on a mixture of manifolds example where
the data is generated from a Lipschitz transformation of a mixture of Gaussian distributions, and
give an error bound for the downstream classiﬁcation task.
Example 3.10 (Mixture of manifolds). Suppose PX is mixture of r ≤d distributions P1, · · · , Pr, where
each Pi is generated by some κ-bi-Lipschitz6 generator Q : Rd′ →Rd on some latent variable z ∈Rd′ with
d′ ≤d which as a mixture of Gaussian distribution:
x ∼Pi ⇐⇒x = Q(z), z ∼N(µi, 1
d′ · Id′×d′).
Let the data augmentation of a natural data sample ¯x be ¯x+ξ where ξ ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id×d) is isotropic Gaussian
noise with 0 < σ ≲
1
√
d. We also assume mini̸=j ∥µi −µj∥2 ≳κ·√log d
√
d′
.
Let ¯y(x) be the most likely mixture index i that generates x: ¯y(x) := arg maxi Pi(x). The simplest
downstream task can have label y(x) = ¯y(x). More generally, let r′ ≤r be the number of labels, and the
label y(x) ∈[r′] in the downstream task be equal to π(¯y(x)) where π is a function that maps [r] to [r′].
We note that the intra-class distance in the latent space is on the scale of Ω(1), which can be
much larger than the distance between class means which is assumed to be ≳κ·√log d
√
d′
. Therefore,
distance-based clustering algorithms do not apply. Moreover, in the simple downstream tasks, the
label for x could be just the index of the mixture where x comes from. We also allow downstream
tasks that merge the r components into r′ labels as long as each mixture component gets the same
label. We apply Theorem 3.8 and get the following theorem:
Theorem 3.11 (Theorem for the mixture of manifolds example). When k ≥2r + 2, Example 3.10
satisﬁes Assumption 3.6 with α ≤
1
poly(d), and has ρ⌊k/2⌋≳
σ
κ
√
d. As a consequence, the error bound is
E(f∗
pop) ≤eO

κ2
σ2·poly(d)

.
The theorem above guarantees small error even when σ is polynomially small. In this case,
the augmentation noise has a much smaller scale than the data (which is at least on the order of
1/κ). This suggests that contrastive learning can non-trivially leverage the structure of the under-
lying data and learn good representations with relatively weak augmentation. To the best of our
knowledge, it is difﬁcult to apply the theorems in previous works (Arora et al., 2019, Lee et al., 2020,
Tosh et al., 2020, 2021, Wei et al., 2020) to this example and get similar guarantees with polynomial
dependencies on d, σ, κ. The work of Wei et al. (2020) can apply to the setting where r is known
and the downstream label is equal to ¯y(x), but cannot handle the case when r is unknown or when
two mixture component can have the same label. We refer the reader to the related work section
for more discussions and comparisons. The proof can be found in Section C.2.
4
Finite-sample generalization bounds
4.1
Unlabeled sample complexity for pretraining
In Section 3, we provide guarantees for spectral contrastive learning on population data.
In this section, we show that these guarantees can be naturally extended to the ﬁnite-sample
6A κ bi-Lipschitz function satisﬁes 1
κ ∥f(x) −f(y)∥2 ≤∥x −y∥2 ≤κ ∥f(x) −f(y)∥2.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
regime with standard concentration bounds. In particular, given a unlabeled pretraining dataset
{¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xnpre} with ¯xi ∼PX , we learn a feature extractor by minimizing the following empirical
spectral contrastive loss:
bLnpre(f) := −2
n
npre
X
i=1
E
x∼A(·|¯xi)
x+∼A(·|¯xi)
h
f(x)⊤f(x+)
i
+
1
npre(npre −1)
X
i̸=j
E
x∼A(·|¯xi)
x−∼A(·|¯xj )

f(x)⊤f(x−)
2
.
It is worth noting that bLnpre(f) is an unbiased estimator of the population spectral con-
trastive loss L(f).
(See Claim D.2 for a proof.)
Therefore, we can derive generalization
bounds via off-the-shelf concentration inequalities. Let F be a hypothesis class containing fea-
ture extractors from X to Rk.
We extend Rademacher complexity to function classes with
high-dimensional outputs and deﬁne the Rademacher complexity of F on n data as bRn(F) :=
maxx1,··· ,xn∈X Eσ
h
supf∈F,i∈[k]
1
n
Pn
j=1 σjfi(xj)
i
, where σ is a uniform random vector in {−1, 1}n
and fi(z) is the i-th dimension of f(z).
Recall that f∗
pop ∈F is a minimizer of L(f). The following theorem with proofs in Section D.1
bounds the population loss of a feature extractor trained with ﬁnite data:
Theorem 4.1 (Excess contrasitve loss). For some κ > 0, assume ∥f(x)∥∞≤κ for all f ∈F and x ∈X.
Let f∗
pop ∈F be a minimizer of the population loss L(f). Given a random dataset of size npre, let ˆfemp ∈F
be a minimizer of empirical loss bLnpre(f). Then, when Assumption 3.7 holds, with probability at least 1 −δ
over the randomness of data, we have
L( ˆfemp) ≤L(f∗
pop) + c1 · bRnpre/2(F) + c2 ·
 s
log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
!
,
where constants c1 ≲k2κ2 + kκ and c2 ≲kκ2 + k2κ4.
The Rademacher complexity usually looks like bRn(F) =
p
R/n where R measures the com-
plexity of F (hence only depends on F). This suggests that when κ is O(1), the sample complexity
for acheiving suboptimality ϵ on population loss is O(k4R/ϵ2). We can apply Theorem 4.1 to any
hypothesis class F of interest (e.g., deep neural networks) and plug in off-the-shelf Rademacher
complexity bounds. For instance, in Section D.2 we give a corollary of Theorem 4.1 when F con-
tains deep neural networks with ReLU activation.
The theorem above shows that we can achieve near-optimal population loss by minimizing
empirical loss up to some small excess loss. The following theorem characterizes how the error
propagates to the linear probe performance mildly under some spectral gap conditions.
Theorem 4.2 (Minimum downstream error). In the setting of Theorem 4.1, suppose Assumption 3.5
holds for ρ > 0, Assumption 3.6 holds for α > 0, Assumption 3.7 holds, and the representation dimension
k ≥max{4r + 2, 2m},. Then, with 1 −δ probability over the randomness of data, for any ˆfemp ∈F that
minimizes the empirical loss bLnpre(f), we have that
E( ˆfemp) ≲α
ρ2 · log k + ck
∆2γ
 
bRnpre/2(F) +
s
log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
!
,
where c ≲(kκ + kκ2 + 1)2, and ∆γ := γ⌊3k/4⌋−γk is the eigenvalue gap between the ⌊3k/4⌋-th and the
k-th eigenvalue.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
This theorem shows that the error on the downstream task only grows linearly with the excess
loss during pretraining. Roughly speaking, one can think of ∆γ as on the order of 1 −γk, hence by
Cheeger’s inequality it’s larger than ρ2. When bRnpre/2(F) =
p
2R/npre and κ ≤O(1), we have that
the number of unlabeled samples required to achieve ϵ downstream error is O(m6R/ϵ2ρ4). We can
relax Assumption 3.7 to approximate realizability in the sense that F contains some sub-optimal
feature extractor under the population spectral loss and pay an additional error term in the linear
probe error bound. The proof of Theorem 4.2 can be found in Section D.3.
4.2
Labeled sample complexity for linear probe
In this section, we provide sample complexity analysis for learning a linear probe with labeled
data. Theorem 3.8 guarantees the existence of a linear probe that achieves a small downstream
classiﬁcation error. However, a priori it is unclear how large the margin of the linear classiﬁer can
be, so it is hard to apply margin theory to provide generalization bounds for 0-1 loss. We could
in principle control the margin of the linear head, but using capped quadratic loss turns out to
sufﬁce and mathematically more convenient. We learn a linear head with the following capped
quadratic loss: given a tuple (z, y(¯x)) where z ∈Rk is a representation of augmented datapoint x ∼
A(·|¯x) and y(¯x) ∈[r] is the label of ¯x, for a linear probe B ∈Rk×r we deﬁne loss ℓ((z, y(¯x)), B) :=
Pr
i=1 min
  B⊤z −⃗y(¯x)
2
i , 1
	
, where ⃗y(¯x) is the one-hot embedding of y(¯x) as a r-dimensional
vector (1 on the y(¯x)-th dimension, 0 on other dimensions). This is a standard modiﬁcation of
quadratic loss in statistical learning theory that ensures the boundedness of the loss for the ease of
analysis (Mohri et al., 2018).
The following Theorem 4.3 provides a generalization guarantee for the linear classiﬁer that
minimizes capped quadratic loss on a labeled downstream dataset of size ndown. The key challenge
of the proof is showing the existence of a small-norm linear head B that gives small population
quadratic loss, which is not obvious from Theorem 4.2 where only small 0-1 error is guaranteed.
Given a labeled dataset {(¯xi, y(¯xi))}ndown
i=1
where ¯xi ∼PX and y(¯xi) is its label, we sample xi ∼
A(·|¯xi) for i ∈[ndown]. Given a norm bound Ck > 0, we learn a linear probe bB by minimizing the
capped quadratic loss subject to a norm constraint:
bB ∈arg min
∥B∥F ≤Ck
ndown
X
i=1
ℓ(( ˆfemp(xi), y(¯xi)), B).
(10)
Theorem 4.3 (End-to-end error bounds with ﬁnite pretraining and downstream samples). In the
setting of Theorem 4.2, choose Ck > 0 such that Ck ≥2(k+1)
γk
. Then, with probability at least 1 −δ over the
randomness of data, for any ˆfemp ∈F that minimizes the empirical pre-training loss bLnpre(f) and a linear
head bB learned from Equation (10), we have
E( ˆfemp, bB) ≲
α
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋
· log k + ck
∆2γ
 
bRnpre/2(F) +
s
log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
!
+

rCk
r
k
ndown
+
s
log 1/δ
ndown

.
Here the ﬁrst term is an error caused by the property fo the population data, which is un-
avoidable even with inﬁnite pretraining and downstream samples (but it can be small as argued in
Section 3.3). The second term is caused by ﬁnite pretraining samples, and the third term is caused
by ﬁnite samples in the linear classiﬁcation on the downstream task.
Typically, the Rademacher complexity is roughly bRnpre/2(F) =
p
2R/npre where R is captures
the complexity of the model architecture. Thus, to achieve ﬁnal linear probe error no more than
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Empirical
pre-training loss
Population
pre-training loss
Minimal
downstream Loss
Empirical
downstream Loss
Population
downstream Loss
pretrain
adapt on 
finite data  
evaluate 
adaptable on 
infinite data  
good pretraining 
on infinite data 
Thm. 4.1
properties of population graph (Ass. 3.5 & 3.6)
+
Thm. 3.8, or its extension Thm. 4.2
handled by supervised DL theory
Thm. 4.3
model expressivity (Ass. 3.7)
bounded model 
complexity
Figure 2: A diagram of our analysis framework. We decompose the problem into a core step that
shows a small population pretraining loss implies a small minimal downstream loss (Theorem 3.8,
or its extension Theorem 4.2) and a few other somewhat standard steps that link empirical losses
to population losses (Theorems 4.1 and Theorem 4.3).
O(ϵ), we would need to select k such that
α
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋·log k ≤ϵ, and we need poly(k,
1
∆γ , R, 1
ϵ) pretraining
samples and poly(k, r, 1
γk , 1
ϵ) downstream samples.
When r < k, the eigengap ∆γ is on the order of 1 −γk which is larger than ρ2 by Cheeger
inequality. Recall that ρ is at least inverse polynomial in d as argued in Section 3.4, one can expect
1
∆γ to be at most poly(d). On the other hand, γk ≈1 so 1
γk can be thought of as a constant. Thus, the
ﬁnal required number of pretraining samples is npre = poly(k, d, R, 1
ϵ) and number of downstream
samples is ndown = poly(r, k, 1
ϵ). We note that the downstream sample complexity doesn’t depend
on the complexity of the hypothesis class R, suggesting that pretraining helps reduce the sample
complexity of the supervised downstream task.
The proof of Theorem 4.3 is in Section E.
5
Analysis Framework and Proof Sketch
As discussed before and suggested by the structured of Section 3 and 4, our analysis frame-
work decompose the problem into a key step about the population cases (Section 3) and a few
other somewhat standard steps that link empirical losses to population losses (Section 4). As de-
picted in Figure 2, the core step (Theorem 3.8, or its extension Theorem 4.2) is to show that a small
population pretraining loss implies the existence of a linear classiﬁer for the downstream task, that
is, a small minimal downstream loss.
We ﬁrst remark that a feature of our analysis framework is that we link the population pretrain-
ing data case to the ﬁnite sample case by showing the empirical and population pretraining losses
are similar when the feature extractors are a parameterized family of models with capacity bounds
(the ﬁrst arrow in Figure 2). Hypothetically, suppose such a connection between population and em-
pirical data case was built through the relationship between the population and empirical graphs,
e.g., by proving that the empirical graph has similar spectral properties as the population graph,
then the sample complexity will be exponential. Intuitively, this is because the population graph
is very sparse, and the empirical graph is with high probability empty if the number of samples is
only polynomial in dimension (e.g. consider the case when the augmentation simply adds small
perturbation, as in the running example in Section 3.1). The empirical graph essentially follows
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
the well-studied random geometric graph model (Penrose, 2003), and tends to have no structure
in high dimension (Brennan et al., 2020, Bubeck et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2021). The fundamental dif-
ference between this hypothetical and our framework is that the empirical graph’s deﬁnition does
not involve any parameterization, and thus the resemblance between the empirical and population
graphs does not leverage the extrapolation (or inductive bias) of the model parameterization as our
framework does for the pretraining losses.
We note that the inductive bias of the parameterized model is indeed used in the anal-
ysis for ﬁnite-sample case.
We assume that the model family F can express the eigenfunc-
tions/eigenvectors of the graph (Assumption 3.7) and also implicitly assume bounds on its
Rademacher complexity (in Theorem 4.3).
Once we obtained that the existence of a linear classiﬁer, the remaining steps (the third and
fourth arrows in Figure 2) follow from standard supervised learning theory.
In the rest of this section, we will give a proof sketch of the population case, which is the more
challenging step.
5.1
Proof Sketch of Theorem 3.8
In this section, we give a proof sketch of Theorem 3.8 in a simpliﬁed binary classiﬁcation setting
where there are only two classes in the downstream task.
Recall that N is the size of X. Recall that wx is the total weight associated with an augmented
datapoint x ∈X, which can also be thought of as the probability mass of x as a randomly sampled
augmented datapoint. In the scope of this section, for demonstrating the key idea, we also assume
that x has uniform distribution, i.e., wx = 1
N for any x ∈X.
Let g : X →{0, 1} be the Bayes optimal classiﬁer for predicting the label given an augmented
datapoint. By Assumption 3.6, g has an error at most α (which is assumed to be small). Thus,
we can think of it as the “target” classiﬁer that we aim to recover. We will show that g can be
approximated by a linear function on top of the learned features. Recall that v1, v2, · · · , vk are
the top-k unit-norm eigenvectors of A and the feature u∗
x for x is the x-th row of the eigenvector
matrix F ∗= [v1, v2, · · · , vk] ∈RN×k. As discussed in Section 3.2, the spectral contrastive loss was
designed to compute a variant of the eigenvector matrix F ∗up to row scaling and right rotation.
More precisely, letting F ∗
pop ∈RN×k be the matrix whose rows contain all the learned embeddings,
Section 3.2 shows that F ∗
pop = D·F ∗·R for a positive diagonal matrix D and an orthonormal matrix
R, and Lemma 3.1 shows that these transformations do not affect the feature quality. Therefore,
in the rest of the section, it sufﬁces to show that linear models on top of F ∗gives the labels of
g. Let ⃗g ∈{0, 1}N be the vector that contains the labels of all the data under the optimal g, i.e.,
⃗gx = g(x). Given a linear head b, note that F ∗b gives the prediction (before the threshold function)
for all examples. Therefore, it sufﬁces to show the existence of a vector b such that
F ∗b ≈⃗g
(11)
Let L ≜I −A be the normalized Laplacian matrix. Then, vi’s are the k smallest unit-norm
eigenvectors of L with eigenvalues λi = 1 −γi. Elementary derivations can give a well-known,
important property of the Laplacian matrix L: the quadratic form ⃗g⊤L⃗g captures the amount of
edges across the two groups that are deﬁned by the binary vector ⃗g (Chung and Graham, 1997,
section 1.2):
⃗g⊤L⃗g = 1
2 ·
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′
√wxwx′ (⃗gx −⃗gx′)2
(12)
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
With slight abuse of notation, suppose (x, x+) is the random variable for a positive pair. Using that
w is the density function for the positive pair and the simpliﬁcation that wx = 1/N, we can rewrite
equation (12) as
⃗g⊤L⃗g = N
2 · Ex,x+[(⃗gx −⃗gx+)2],
(13)
Note that Ex,x+[(⃗gx −⃗gx+)2] is the probability that a positive pair have different labels under the
Bayes optimal classiﬁer g. Because Assumption 3.6 assumes that the labels can be almost deter-
mined by the augmented data, we can show that two augmentations of the same datapoint should
rarely produce different labels under the Bayes optimal classiﬁer. We will prove in Lemma B.5 via
simple calculation that
⃗g⊤L⃗g ≤Nα
(14)
(We can sanity-check the special case when α = 0, that is, the label is determined by the aug-
mentation. In this case, g(x) = g(x+) for a positive pair (x, x+) w.p. 1, which implies ⃗g⊤L⃗g =
N
2 · Ex,x+[(⃗gx −⃗gx+)2] = 0.)
Next, we use equation (14) to link ⃗g to the eigenvectors of L. Let λk+1 ≤. . . λN be the rest of
eigenvalues with unit-norm eigenvectors vk+1, . . . , vN. Let Π ≜Pk
i=1 viv⊤
i and Π⊥≜PN
i=k+1 viv⊤
i
be the projection operators onto the subspaces spanned by the ﬁrst k and the last N −k eigenvectors,
respectively. Equation (14) implies that ⃗g has limited projection to the subspace of Π⊥:
Nα ≥⃗g⊤L⃗g = (Π⃗g + Π⊥⃗g)⊤L (Π⃗g + Π⊥⃗g) ≥(Π⊥⃗g)⊤L (Π⊥⃗g) ≥λk+1 ∥Π⊥⃗g∥2
2 ,
(15)
where the ﬁrst inequality follows from dropping the ∥(Π⃗g)⊤LΠ⃗g∥2
2 and using Π⊥LΠ = 0, and the
second inequality is because that Π⊥only contains eigenvectors with eigenvalue at least λk+1.
Note that Π⃗g is in the span of eigenvectors v1, . . . , vk, that is, the column-span of F ∗. Therefore,
there exists b ∈Rk such that Π⃗g = F ∗b. As a consequence,
∥⃗g −F ∗b∥2
2 = ∥Π⊥⃗g∥2
2 ≤Nα
λk+1
(16)
By higher-order Cheeger inequality (see Lemma B.4), we have that λk+1 ≳ρ2
⌈k/2⌉. Then, we obtain
the mean-squared error bound:
1
N ∥⃗g −F ∗b∥2
2 ≤α/ρ2
⌈k/2⌉
(17)
The steps above demonstrate the gist of the proofs, which are formalized in more generality in
Section B.1. We will also need two minor steps to complete the proof of Theorem 3.8. First, we
can convert the mean-squared error bound to classiﬁcation error bound: because F ∗b is close to
the binary vector ⃗g in mean-squared error, 1 [F ∗b > 1/2] is close to ⃗g in 0-1 error. (See Claim B.9
for the formal argument.) Next, F ∗b only gives the prediction of the model given the augmented
datapoint. We will show in Section B.2 that averaging the predictions on the augmentations of a
data ponit will not increase the classiﬁcation error.
6
Experiments
We test spectral contrastive learning on benchmark vision datasets. We minimize the empir-
ical spectral contrastive loss with an encoder network f and sample fresh augmentation in each
iteration. The pseudo-code for the algorithm and more implementation details can be found in
Section A.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Encoder / feature extractor. The encoder f contains three components: a backbone network, a pro-
jection MLP and a projection function. The backbone network is a standard ResNet architecture.
The projection MLP is a fully connected network with BN applied to each layer, and ReLU activa-
tion applied to each except for the last layer. The projection function takes a vector and projects it
to a sphere ball with radius √µ, where µ > 0 is a hyperparameter that we tune in experiments. We
ﬁnd that using a projection MLP and a projection function improves the performance.
Linear evaluation protocol. Given the pre-trained encoder network, we follow the standard linear
evaluation protocol (Chen and He, 2020) and train a supervised linear classiﬁer on frozen represen-
tations, which are from the ResNet’s global average pooling layer.
Results.
We report the accuracy on CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky and Hinton, 2009) and Tiny-
ImageNet (Le and Yang, 2015) in Table 1. Our empirical results show that spectral contrastive
learning achieves better performance than two popular baseline algorithms SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a) and SimSiam (Chen and He, 2020). In Table 2 we report results on ImageNet (Deng et al.,
2009) dataset, and show that our algorithm achieves similar performance as other state-of-the-art
methods. We note that our algorithm is much more principled than previous methods and doesn’t
rely on large batch sizes (SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a)), momentum encoders (BYOL (Grill et al.,
2020) and MoCo (He et al., 2020)) or additional tricks such as stop-gradient (SimSiam (Chen and
He, 2020)).
Datasets
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
Tiny-ImageNet
Epochs
200
400
800
200
400
800
200
400
800
SimCLR (repro.)
83.73
87.72
90.60
54.74
61.05
63.88
43.30
46.46
48.12
SimSiam (repro.)
87.54
90.31
91.40
61.56
64.96
65.87
34.82
39.46
46.76
Ours
88.66
90.17
92.07
62.45
65.82
66.18
41.30
45.36
49.86
Table 1: Top-1 accuracy under linear evaluation protocal.
SimCLR
BYOL
MoCo v2
SimSiam
Ours
acc. (%)
66.5
66.5
67.4
68.1
66.97
Table 2: ImageNet linear evaluation accuracy with 100-epoch pre-training. All results but ours are
reported from (Chen and He, 2020). We use batch size 384 during pre-training.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we present a novel theoretical framework of self-supervised learning and provide
provable guarantees for the learned representation on downstream linear classiﬁcation tasks. We
hope the framework could facilitate future theoretical analyses of self-supervised pretraining losses
and inspire new methods. It does not capture the potential implicit bias of optimizers but does take
into account the inductive bias of the models. By abstracting away the effect of optimization, we can
focus on the effect of pretraining losses and their interaction with the structure of the population
data. Future directions may include designing better pretraining losses and analyzing more ﬁne-
grained properties of the learned representations (e.g., as in recent follow-up works (HaoChen et al.,
2022, Shen et al., 2022)), by potentially leveraging more advanced techniques from spectral graph
theory.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Acknowledgements
We thank Margalit Glasgow, Ananya Kumar, Jason D. Lee, Sang Michael Xie, and Guodong
Zhang for helpful discussions. CW acknowledges support from an NSF Graduate Research Fellow-
ship. TM acknowledges support of Google Faculty Award and NSF IIS 2045685. We also acknowl-
edge the support of HAI and the Google Cloud. Toyota Research Institute ("TRI") provided funds
to assist the authors with their research but this article solely reﬂects the opinions and conclusions
of its authors and not TRI or any other Toyota entity.
References
Emmanuel Abbe. Community detection and stochastic block models: recent developments, 2017.
Sanjeev Arora, Satish Rao, and Umesh Vazirani. Expander ﬂows, geometric embeddings and graph
partitioning. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 56(2):1–37, 2009.
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.09229, 2019.
Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximiz-
ing mutual information across views. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00910, 2019.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Avrim Blum, and Ke Yang. Co-training and expansion: Towards bridging
theory and practice. Advances in neural information processing systems, 17:89–96, 2005.
Yamini Bansal, Gal Kaplun, and Boaz Barak. For self-supervised learning, rationality implies gen-
eralization, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08508, 2020.
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regulariza-
tion for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.
Avrim Blum and Tom Mitchell. Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceed-
ings of the eleventh annual conference on Computational learning theory, pages 92–100, 1998.
Sergey G Bobkov et al. An isoperimetric inequality on the discrete cube, and an elementary proof
of the isoperimetric inequality in gauss space. The Annals of Probability, 25(1):206–214, 1997.
Matthew Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Nagaraj. Phase transitions for detecting latent geome-
try in random graphs. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 178(3):1215–1289, 2020.
Jane Bromley, Isabelle Guyon, Yann LeCun, Eduard Säckinger, and Roopak Shah. Signature ver-
iﬁcation using a" siamese" time delay neural network. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 6:737–744, 1993.
Sébastien Bubeck, Jian Ding, Ronen Eldan, and Miklós Z Rácz. Testing for high-dimensional geom-
etry in random graphs. Random Structures & Algorithms, 49(3):503–532, 2016.
Daniel Bump. Automorphic forms and representations. Number 55. Cambridge university press, 1998.
Peter Buser. A note on the isoperimetric constant. In Annales scientiﬁques de l’École normale supérieure,
volume 15, pages 213–230, 1982.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
Tianle Cai, Ruiqi Gao, Jason D Lee, and Qi Lei. A theory of label propagation for subpopulation
shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11203, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.09882, 2020.
Jeff Cheeger. A lower bound for the smallest eigenvalue of the laplacian. In Proceedings of the
Princeton conference in honor of Professor S. Bochner, pages 195–199, 1969.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pages
1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. Big self-
supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029, 2020b.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.10566, 2020.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved baselines with momentum
contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04297, 2020c.
Yuansi Chen. An almost constant lower bound of the isoperimetric coefﬁcient in the kls conjecture.
Geometric and Functional Analysis, 31(1):34–61, 2021.
Fan RK Chung and Fan Chung Graham. Spectral graph theory. Number 92. American Mathematical
Soc., 1997.
Tri Dao, Albert Gu, Alexander Ratner, Virginia Smith, Chris De Sa, and Christopher Ré. A kernel
theory of modern data augmentation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1528–
1537. PMLR, 2019.
Sanjoy Dasgupta, Michael L Littman, and David McAllester. Pac generalization bounds for co-
training. Advances in neural information processing systems, 1:375–382, 2002.
J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical
Image Database. In CVPR09, 2009.
Luc Devroye, Abbas Mehrabian, and Tommy Reddad. The total variation distance between high-
dimensional gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08693, 2018.
Carl Eckart and Gale Young. The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank. Psychome-
trika, 1(3):211–218, 1936.
Noah Golowich, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir. Size-independent sample complexity of
neural networks. In Conference On Learning Theory, pages 297–299. PMLR, 2018.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H Richemond, Elena
Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.07733, 2020.
Heinrich Walter Guggenheimer. Applicable Geometry: Global and Local Convexity. RE Krieger Pub-
lishing Company, 1977.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and Tengyu Ma.
Beyond separability: Analyzing
the linear transferability of contrastive representations to related subpopulations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02683, 2022.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for un-
supervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9729–9738, 2020.
Olivier Henaff. Data-efﬁcient image recognition with contrastive predictive coding. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4182–4192. PMLR, 2020.
R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan Grewal, Phil Bachman, Adam
Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep representations by mutual information estimation
and maximization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Ravi Kannan, Santosh Vempala, and Adrian Vetta. On clusterings: Good, bad and spectral. Journal
of the ACM (JACM), 51(3):497–515, 2004.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7:7, 2015.
James R Lee, Shayan Oveis Gharan, and Luca Trevisan. Multiway spectral partitioning and higher-
order cheeger inequalities. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 61(6):1–30, 2014.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
Provable self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01064, 2020.
Yin Tat Lee and Santosh S Vempala.
Eldan’s stochastic localization and the kls conjecture:
Isoperimetry, concentration and mixing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.01507, 2016.
Jing Lei, Alessandro Rinaldo, et al. Consistency of spectral clustering in stochastic block models.
Annals of Statistics, 43(1):215–237, 2015.
Tom Leighton and Satish Rao. Multicommodity max-ﬂow min-cut theorems and their use in de-
signing approximation algorithms. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 46(6):787–832, 1999.
Siqi Liu, Sidhanth Mohanty, Tselil Schramm, and Elizabeth Yang.
Testing thresholds for high-
dimensional sparse random geometric graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11316, 2021.
Anand Louis and Konstantin Makarychev. Approximation algorithm for sparsest k-partitioning. In
Proceedings of the twenty-ﬁfth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 1244–1255.
SIAM, 2014.
Anand Louis, Prasad Raghavendra, Prasad Tetali, and Santosh Vempala. Algorithmic extensions of
cheeger’s inequality to higher eigenvalues and partitions. In Approximation, Randomization, and
Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, pages 315–326. Springer, 2011.
Frank McSherry. Spectral partitioning of random graphs. In Proceedings 42nd IEEE Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science, pages 529–537. IEEE, 2001.
Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. Self-supervised learning of pretext-invariant representa-
tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6707–6717, 2020.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Jovana Mitrovic, Brian McWilliams, Jacob Walker, Lars Buesing, and Charles Blundell. Representa-
tion learning via invariant causal mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07922, 2020.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning. MIT
press, 2018.
Boaz Nadler, Nathan Srebro, and Xueyuan Zhou. Semi-supervised learning with the graph lapla-
cian: The limit of inﬁnite unlabelled data. Advances in neural information processing systems, 22:
1330–1338, 2009.
Andrew Ng, Michael Jordan, and Yair Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 14:849–856, 2001.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Mathew Penrose. Random geometric graphs, volume 5. OUP Oxford, 2003.
Geoffrey Schiebinger, Martin J Wainwright, and Bin Yu. The geometry of kernelized spectral clus-
tering. The Annals of Statistics, 43(2):819–846, 2015.
Kendrick Shen, Robbie Jones, Ananya Kumar, Sang Michael Xie, Jeff Z HaoChen, Tengyu Ma, and
Percy Liang. Connect, not collapse: Explaining contrastive learning for unsupervised domain
adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00570, 2022.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000.
Kihyuk Sohn. Improved deep metric learning with multi-class n-pair loss objective. In Proceedings
of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1857–1865, 2016.
Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola. Contrastive multiview coding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05849, 2019.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What
makes for good views for contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10243, 2020a.
Yuandong Tian, Lantao Yu, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Understanding self-supervised learn-
ing with dual deep networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00578, 2020b.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive estimation reveals topic
posterior information to linear models. arXiv:2003.02234, 2020.
Christopher Tosh, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Daniel Hsu. Contrastive learning, multi-view re-
dundancy, and linear models. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pages 1179–1206. PMLR, 2021.
Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Yue Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency.
Self-
supervised learning from a multi-view perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05576, 2020.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola.
Understanding contrastive representation learning through
alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.
Colin Wei, Kendrick Shen, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Theoretical analysis of self-training with
deep networks on unlabeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03622, 2020.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Wikipedia contributors.
Hilbert–schmidt integral operator — Wikipedia, the free encyclope-
dia, 2020.
URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hilbert%E2%80%
93Schmidt_integral_operator&oldid=986771357. [Online; accessed 21-July-2021].
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
parametric instance discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 3733–3742, 2018.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Minh-Thang Luong, and Quoc V Le. Unsupervised data
augmentation for consistency training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12848, 2019.
Mang Ye, Xu Zhang, Pong C Yuen, and Shih-Fu Chang. Unsupervised embedding learning via
invariant and spreading instance feature. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6210–6219, 2019.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
learning via redundancy reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03230, 2021.
Richard Zemel and Miguel Carreira-Perpiñán. Proximity graphs for clustering and manifold learn-
ing. Advances in neural information processing systems, 17, 2004.
Xiaojin Zhu, Zoubin Ghahramani, and John D Lafferty. Semi-supervised learning using gaussian
ﬁelds and harmonic functions. In Proceedings of the 20th International conference on Machine learning
(ICML-03), pages 912–919, 2003.
Roland S Zimmermann, Yash Sharma, Steffen Schneider, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel.
Contrastive learning inverts the data generating process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.08850, 2021.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
A
Experiment details
The pseudo-code for our empirical algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Spectral Contrastive Learning
Require: batch size N, structure of encoder network f
1: for sampled minibatch {¯xi}N
i=1 do
2:
for i ∈{1, · · · , N} do
3:
draw two augmentations xi = aug(¯xi) and x′
i = aug(¯xi).
4:
compute zi = f(xi) and z′
i = f(x′
i).
5:
compute loss L = −2
N
PN
i=1 z⊤
i z′
i +
1
N(N−1)
P
i̸=j(z⊤
i z′
j)2
6:
update f to minimize L
7: return encoder network f(·)
Our results with different hyperparameters on CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet are listed in
Table 3.
Datasets
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
Tiny-ImageNet
Epochs
200
400
800
200
400
800
200
400
800
SimCLR (repro.)
83.73
87.72
90.60
54.74
61.05
63.88
43.30
46.46
48.12
SimSiam (repro.)
87.54
90.31
91.40
61.56
64.96
65.87
34.82
39.46
46.76
Ours (µ = 1)
86.47
89.90
92.07
59.13
63.83
65.52
28.76
33.94
40.82
Ours (µ = 3)
87.72
90.09
91.84
61.05
64.79
66.18
40.06
42.52
49.86
Ours (µ = 10)
88.66
90.17
91.01
62.45
65.82
65.16
41.30
45.36
47.84
Table 3: Top-1 accuracy under linear evaluation protocal.
Additional details about the encoder. For the backbone network, we use the CIFAR variant
of ResNet18 for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 experiments and use ResNet50 for Tiny-ImageNet and
ImageNet experiments. For the projection MLP, we use a 2-layer MLP with hidden and output
dimensions 1000 for CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and Tiny-ImageNet experiments. We use a 3-layer MLP
with hidden and output dimension 8192 for ImageNet experiments. We set µ = 10 in the ImageNet
experiment, and set µ ∈{1, 3, 10} for the CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet experiments.
Training the encoder. We train the neural network using SGD with momentum 0.9. The
learning rate starts at 0.05 and decreases to 0 with a cosine schedule. On CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny-
ImageNet we use weight decay 0.0005 and train for 800 epochs with batch size 512. On ImageNet
we use weight decay 0.0001 and train for 100 epochs with batch size 384. We use 1 GTX 1080
GPU for CIFAR-10/100 and Tiny-ImageNet experiments, and use 8 GTX 1080 GPUs for ImageNet
experiments.
Linear evaluation protocol. We train the linear head using SGD with batch size 256 and weight
decay 0 for 100 epochs, learning rate starts at 30.0 and is decayed by 10x at the 60th and 80th epochs.
Image transformation details. We use the same augmentation strategy as described in (Chen
and He, 2020).
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
B
Proofs for Section 3
We ﬁrst prove a more generalized version of Theorem 3.8 in section B.1, and then prove Theo-
rem 3.8 in Section B.2.
B.1
A generalized version of Theorem 3.8
For the proof we will follow the convention in literature (Lee et al., 2014) and deﬁne the nor-
malized Laplacian matrix as follows:
Deﬁnition B.1. Let G = (X, w) be the augmentation graph deﬁned in Section 3.1. The normalized Lapla-
cian matrix of the graph is deﬁned as L = I −D−1/2AD−1/2, where A is the adjacency matrix with
Axx′ = wxx′ and D is a diagonal matrix with Dxx = wx.
It is easy to see that L = I−A where A is the normalized adjacency matrix deﬁned in Section 3.1.
Therefore, when λi is the i-th smallest eigenvalue of L, 1 −λi is the i-th largest eigenvalue of A.
We call a function deﬁned on augmented data ˆy : X →[r] an extended labeling function. Given an
extended labeling function, we deﬁne the following quantity that describes the difference between
extended labels of two augmented data of the same natural datapoint:
φˆy :=
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

.
(18)
We also deﬁne the following quantity that describes the difference between extended label of an
augmentated datapoint and the ground truth label of the corresponding natural datapoint:
∆(y, ˆy) :=
Pr
x∼PX ,˜x∼A(·|x) (ˆy(˜x) ̸= y(x)) .
(19)
Recall the spectral contrastive loss deﬁned in Section 3.2 is:
L(f) := E
x1∼PX ,x2∼PX ,
x∼A(·|x1),x+∼A(·|x1),x′∼A(·|x2)

−2 · f(x)⊤f(x+) +

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
.
We ﬁrst state a more general version of Theorem 3.8 as follows.
Theorem B.2. Assume the set of augmented data X is ﬁnite. Let f∗
pop ∈arg minf:X→Rk L(f) be a mini-
mizer of the population spectral contrastive loss L(f) with k ∈Z+. Let k′ ≥r such that k + 1 = (1 + ζ)k′,
where ζ ∈(0, 1) and k′ ∈Z+. Then, there exists a linear probe B∗∈Rr×k and a universal constant c such
that the linear probe predictor satisﬁes
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗y(¯x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2

≤c ·

poly(1/ζ) · log(k + 1) · φˆy
ρ2
k′
+ ∆(y, ˆy)

,
where ⃗y(¯x) is the one-hot embedding of y(¯x) and ρk′ is the sparsest m-partition deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.4.
Furthermore, the error of the linear probe predictor can be bounded by
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≤2c ·

poly(1/ζ) · log(k + 1) · φˆy
ρ2
k′
+ ∆(y, ˆy)

.
Also, if we let λi be the i-th smallest eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian matrix of the graph of
the augmented data, we can ﬁnd a matrix B∗satisfying the above equations with norm bound ∥B∗∥F ≤
1/(1 −λk).
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
We provide the proof for Theorem B.2 below.
Let λ1, λ2, · · · , λk, λk+1 be the k + 1 smallest eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix L. The follow-
ing theorem gives a theoretical guarantee similar to Theorem B.2 except for that the bound depends
on λk+1:
Theorem B.3. Assume the set of augmented data X is ﬁnite. Let f∗
pop ∈arg minf:X→Rk be a minimizer
of the population spectral contrastive loss L(f) with k ∈Z+. Then, for any labeling function ˆy : X →[r]
there exists a linear probe B∗∈Rr×k with norm ∥B∗∥F ≤1/(1 −λk) such that
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗y(¯x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2

≤
φˆy
λk+1
+ 4∆(y, ˆy),
where ⃗y(¯x) is the one-hot embedding of y(¯x). Furthermore, the error can be bounded by
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≤2φˆy
λk+1
+ 8∆(y, ˆy).
We defer the proof of Theorem B.3 to Section B.3.
To get rid of the dependency on λk+1, we use following higher-order Cheeger’s inequality
from (Louis and Makarychev, 2014).
Lemma B.4 (Proposition 1.2 in (Louis and Makarychev, 2014)). Let G = (V, w) be a weight graph with
|V | = N. Then, for any t ∈[N] and ζ > 0 such that (1 + ζ)t ∈[N], there exists a partition S1, S2, · · · , St
of V with
φG(Si) ≲poly(1/ζ)
q
λ(1+ζ)t log t,
where φG(·) is the Dirichlet conductance deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.3.
Now we prove Theorem B.2 by combining TheoremB.3 and Lemma B.4.
Proof of Theorem B.2. Let G = (X, w) be the augmentation graph. In Lemma B.4 let (1 + ζ)t =
k + 1 and t
=
k′ we have:
there exists partition S1, · · · , Sk′
⊂
X such that φG(Si)
≲
poly(1/ζ)
p
λk+1 log (k + 1) for ∀i ∈[k′].
By Deﬁnition 3.4, we have ρk′ ≤maxi∈[k′] φG(Si) ≲
poly(1/ζ)
p
λk+1 log (k + 1), which leads to
1
λk+1 ≲poly(1/ζ) · log(k + 1) ·
1
ρ2
k′ . Plugging this bound
to Theorem B.3 ﬁnishes the proof.
B.2
Proof of Theorem 3.8
We will use the following lemma which gives a connection between φˆy, ∆(y, ˆy) and Assump-
tion 3.6.
Lemma B.5. Let G = (X, w) be the augmentation graph, r be the number of underlying classes. Let
S1, S2, · · · , Sr be the partition induced by the classiﬁer g in Assumption 3.6. Then, there exists an extended
labeling function ˆy such that
∆(y, ˆy) ≤α
and
φˆy =
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

≤2α.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
Proof of Lemma B.5. We deﬁne function ˆy : X →[r] as follows: for an augmented data x ∈X, we
use function ˆy(x) to represent the index of set that x is in, i.e., x ∈Sˆy(x). By Assumption 3.6 it is
easy to see ∆(y, ˆy) ≤α. On the other hand, we have
φˆy =
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

=
X
x,x′∈X
E¯x∼PX

A(x|¯x)A(x′|¯x) · 1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

≤
X
x,x′∈X
E¯x∼PX

A(x|¯x)A(x′|¯x) ·
 1 [ˆy(x) ̸= y(¯x)] + 1

ˆy(x′) ̸= y(¯x)

=2 · E¯x∼PX [A(x|¯x) · 1 [ˆy(x) ̸= y(¯x)]]
=2 ·
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
 x /∈Sy(¯x)

= 2α.
Here the inequality is because when ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′), there must be ˆy(x) ̸= y(¯x) or ˆy(x′) ̸= y(¯x).
Now we give the proof of Theorem 3.8 using Lemma B.5 and Theorem B.2.
Proof of Theorem 3.8. Let S1, S2, · · · , Sr be the partition of X induced by the classiﬁer g given in
Assumption 3.6. Deﬁne function ˆy : X →[r] as follows: for an augmented datapoint x ∈X, we use
function ˆy(x) to represent the index of set that x is in, i.e., x ∈Sˆy(x). Let k′ = ⌊k
2⌋in Theorem B.2, we
have Pr¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲log(k) ·
φˆy
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋+ ∆(y, ˆy). By Lemma B.5 we have φˆy ≤2α
and ∆(y, ˆy) ≤α, so we have Pr¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲
α
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋· log(k). Notice that by
deﬁnition of ensembled linear probe predictor, ¯gf ∗
pop,B∗(¯x) ̸= y(¯x) happens only if more than half
of the augmentations of ¯x predicts differently from y(¯x), so we have Pr¯x∼PX

¯gf ∗
pop,B∗(¯x) ̸= y(¯x)

≤
2 Pr¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲
α
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋· log(k).
B.3
Proof of Theorem B.3
The proof of Theorem B.3 contains two steps. First, we show that when the feature extractor is
composed of the minimal eigenvectors of the normalized Laplacian matrix L, we can achieve good
linear probe accuracy. Then we show that minimizing L(f) gives us a feature extractor equally
good as the eigenvectors.
For the ﬁrst step, we use the following lemma which shows that the smallest eigenvectors of
L can approximate any function on X up to an error proportional to the Rayleigh quotient of the
function.
Lemma B.6. Let L be the normalized Laplacian matrix of some graph G. Let N = |X| be total number of
augmented data, vi be the i-th smallest unit-norm eigenvector of L with eigenvalue λi (make them orthogonal
in case of repeated eignevalues). Let R(u) := u⊤Lu
u⊤u be the Rayleigh quotient of a vector u ∈RN . Then, for
any k ∈Z+ such that k < N and λk+1 > 0, there exists a vector b ∈Rk with norm ∥b∥2 ≤∥u∥2 such that
u −
k
X
i=1
bivi

2
2
≤R(u)
λk+1
∥u∥2
2 .
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Proof of Lemma B.6. We can decompose the vector u in the eigenvector basis as:
u =
N
X
i=1
ζivi.
We have
R(u) =
PN
i=1 λiζ2
i
∥u∥2
2
.
Let b ∈Rk be the vector such that bi = ζi. Obviously we have ∥b∥2
2 ≤∥u∥2
2. Noticing that
u −
k
X
i=1
bivi

2
2
=
N
X
i=k+1
ζ2
i ≤R(u)
λk+1
∥u∥2
2 ,
which ﬁnishes the proof.
We also need the following claim about the Rayleigh quotient R(u) when u is a vector deﬁned
by an extended labeling function ˆy.
Claim B.7. In the setting of Lemma B.6, let ˆy be an extended labeling function. Fix i ∈[r]. Deﬁne function
uˆy
i (x) := √wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i] and uˆy
i is the corresponding vector in RN. Also deﬁne the following quantity:
φˆy
i :=
P
x,x′∈X wxx′ · 1 [(ˆy(x) = i ∧ˆy(x′) ̸= i) or (ˆy(x) ̸= i ∧ˆy(x′) = i)]
P
x∈X wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i]
.
Then, we have
R(uˆy
i ) = 1
2φˆy
i .
Proof of Claim B.7. Let f be any function X →R, deﬁne function u(x) := √wx · f(x). Let u ∈RN
be the vector corresponding to u. Let A be the adjacency matrix with Axx′ = wxx′ and D be the
diagonal matrix with Dxx = wx. By deﬁnition of Laplacian matrix, we have
u⊤Lu = ∥u∥2
2 −u⊤D−1/2AD−1/2u
=
X
x∈X
wxf(x)2 −
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′f(x)f(x′)
= 1
2
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ ·
 f(x) −f(x′)
2 .
Therefore we have
R(u) = u⊤Lu
u⊤u
= 1
2 ·
P
x,x′∈X wxx′ · (f(x) −f(x′))2
P
x∈X wx · f(x)2
.
Setting f(x) = 1 [ˆy(x) = i] ﬁnishes the proof.
To see the connection between the feature extractor minimizing the population spectral con-
trastive loss L(f) and the feature extractor corresponding to eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix,
we use the following lemma which states that the minimizer of the matrix approximation loss de-
ﬁned in Section 3.2 is equivalent to the minimizer of population spectral contrastive loss up to a
data-wise scaling.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Lemma B.8. Let f : X →Rk be a feature extractor, matrix F ∈RN×k be such that its x-th row is
√wx · f(x). Then, F is a minimizer of Lmf(F) if and only if f is a minimizer of the population spectral
contrastive loss L(f).
Proof of Lemma B.8. Notice that
Lmf(F) =
(I −L) −FF ⊤
2
F
=
X
x,x′∈X

wxx′
√wxwx′ −√wxwx′f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
=
X
x,x′∈X
wxwx′

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
−2
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′f(x)⊤f(x′) + ∥I −L∥2
F .
(20)
Recall that the deﬁnition of spectral contrastive loss is
L(f) := −2 · Ex,x+
h
f(x)⊤f(x+)
i
+ Ex,x−

f(x)⊤f(x−)
2
,
where (x, x+) is a random positive pair, (x, x−) is a random negative pair. We can rewrite the
spectral contrastive loss as
L(f) = −2
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · f(x)⊤f(x′) +
X
x,x′∈X
wxwx′ ·

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
.
(21)
Compare Equation (20) and Equation (21), we see they only differ by a constant, which ﬁnishes
the proof.
Note that the minimizer of matrix approximation loss is exactly the largest eigenvectors of I−L
(also the smallest eigenvectors of L) due to Eckart–Young–Mirsky theorem, Lemma B.8 indicates
that the minimizer of L(f) is equivalent to the smallest eigenvectors of L up to data-wise scaling.
The following claim shows the relationship between quadratic loss and prediction error.
Claim B.9. Let f : X →Rk be a feature extractor, B ∈Rk×k be a linear head. Let gf,B be the predictor
deﬁned in Section 3. Then, for any x ∈X and label y ∈[k], we have
∥⃗y −Bf(x)∥2
2 ≥1
2 · 1 [y ̸= gf,B(x)] ,
where ⃗y is the one-hot embedding of y.
Proof. When y ̸= gf,B(x), by the deﬁnition of gf,B we know that there exists another y′ ̸= y such
that (Bf(x))y′ ≥(Bf(x))y. In this case,
∥⃗y −Bf(x)∥2
2 ≥(1 −(Bf(x))y)2 + (Bf(x))2
y′
(22)
≥1
2 (1 −(Bf(x))y + (Bf(x))y′)2
(23)
≥1
2,
(24)
where the ﬁrst inequality is by omitting all the dimensions in the ℓ2 norm other than the y-th and
y′-th dimensions, the second inequality is by Jensen’s inequality, and the third inequality is because
(Bf(x))y′ ≥(Bf(x))y. This proves the inequality in the claim when y ̸= gf,B(x). Finally, we ﬁnish
the proof by noticing that the inequality in this claim obviously holds when y = gf,B(x).
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Now we are ready to prove Theorem B.3 by combining Lemma B.6, Claim B.7, Lemma B.8 and
Claim B.9.
Proof of Theorem B.3. Let Fsc = [v1, v2, · · · , vk] be the matrix that contains the smallest k eigenvectors
of L as columns. For each i ∈[r], we deﬁne function uˆy
i (x) := √wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i] and uˆy
i be the
corresponding vector in RN. By Lemma B.6, there exists a vector bi ∈Rk with norm bound ∥bi∥2 ≤
uˆy
i

2 such that
uˆy
i −Fscbi

2
2 ≤R(uˆy
i )
λk+1
uˆy
i

2
2 .
(25)
By Claim B.7, we have
R(uˆy
i ) = 1
2φˆy
i = 1
2 ·
P
x,x′∈X wxx′ · 1 [(ˆy(x) = i ∧ˆy(x′) ̸= i) or (ˆy(x) ̸= i ∧ˆy(x′) = i)]
P
x∈X wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i]
.
So we can rewrite Equation (25) as:
uˆy
i −Fscbi

2
2 ≤
φˆy
i
2λk+1
·
X
x∈X
wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i]
=
1
2λk+1
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

(ˆy(x) = i ∧ˆy(x′) ̸= i) or (ˆy(x) ̸= i ∧ˆy(x′) = i)

.
(26)
Let matrix U = [uˆy
1, · · · , uˆy
r] contains all uˆy
i as columns, and let u : X →Rr be the corresponding
feature extractor. Deﬁne matrix B ∈RN×k such that B⊤= [b1, · · · , br]. Summing Equation (26) over
all i ∈[r] and by the deﬁnition of φˆy we have
U −FscB⊤
2
F ≤
1
2λk+1
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

=
φˆy
2λk+1
,
(27)
where
∥B∥2
F =
r
X
i=1
∥bi∥2
2 ≤
r
X
i=1
uˆy
i

2
2 =
X
x∈X
wx = 1.
Now we come back to the feature extractor f∗
pop that minimizes the spectral contrastive loss
function L(f). By Lemma B.8, matrix F ∗that contains √wx · f∗
pop(x) as its x-th row is a minimizer
of Lmf(F). By Eckard-Young-Mirsky theorem, we have
F ∗= FscDλQ,
where Q is an orthonormal matrix and
Dλ =


√1 −λ1
√1 −λ2
· · ·
√1 −λk

.
Let
B∗= BD−1
λ Q−1,
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
and let ⃗y(¯x) be the one-hot embedding of y(¯x), ⃗ˆy(x) be the one-hot embedding of ˆy(x), we have
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗y(¯x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2

≤2E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗ˆy(x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2

+ 2E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗ˆy(x) −⃗y(¯x)

2
2

=2
X
x∈X
wx ·
⃗ˆy(x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2 + 4∆(y, ˆy)
(because wx is the probability of x)
=2
U −F ∗B∗⊤
2
F + 4∆(y, ˆy)
(rewrite in matrix form)
=2
U −FscB⊤
2
F + 4∆(y, ˆy)
(by deﬁnition of B∗)
≤φˆy
λk+1
+ 4∆(y, ˆy).
(by Equation (27))
To bound the error rate, we ﬁrst notice that Claim B.9 tells us that for any x ∈X,
⃗y(¯x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2 ≥1
2 · 1
h
gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)
i
.
(28)
Now we bound the error rate on X as follows:
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

gf ∗
pop,B∗(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≤2E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗y(¯x) −B∗f∗
pop(x)

2
2

(by Equation (28))
≤2φˆy
λk+1
+ 8∆(y, ˆy).
Finally we bound the norm of B∗as
∥B∗∥2
F = Tr

B∗B∗⊤
= Tr

BD−2
λ B⊤
≤
1
1 −λk
∥B∥2
F =
1
1 −λk
.
C
Proofs for Section 3.4
C.1
Proof of Proposition 3.9
Proof of Proposition 3.9. Let Bσ be the uniform distribution over a ball with radius σ.
Let
S1, S2, · · · , Sm+1 be a partition of the Euclidean space. There must be some i ∈[m + 1] such that
Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si] ≤1
2 for all j ∈[m]. Thus, we know that
ρm+1 ≥φG(Si) ≥min
j∈[m]
Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ,ξ′∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si ∧x + ξ′ /∈Si]
Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si]
.
(29)
For x ∈Rd, we use P(Si|x) as a shorthand for Prξ∼Bσ(x + ξ ∈Si). Let
R :=

x
 Pr(Si|x) ≥2
3

.
(30)
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
On one hand, suppose
R
x/∈R Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx ≥1
2 Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si], we can lower bound the
numerator in the RHS of Equation (29) as
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ,ξ′∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si ∧x + ξ′ /∈Si] ≥
Z
x/∈R
Pj(x)P(Si|x)(1 −P(Si|x))dx
(31)
≥1
6
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si],
(32)
hence the RHS of Equation (29) is at least 1/6.
On the other hand, suppose
R
x/∈R Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx < 1
2 Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si], we have
Z
x∈R
Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx =
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si] −
Z
x/∈R
Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx ≥1
2
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si],
(33)
hence the denominator of the RHS of Equation (29) can be upper bounded by
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si] ≤2
Z
x∈R
P(Si|x)Pj(x)dx ≤2
Z
x∈R
Pj(x)dx.
(34)
Deﬁne
N(R) :=

x
 ∥x −a∥2 ≤σ
6 for some a ∈R

.
(35)
For two Gaussian distributions with variance σ2 · Id×d and centers at most σ
6 far from each other,
their TV-distance is at most 1
6 (see the ﬁrst equation on Page 5 of (Devroye et al., 2018)), hence for
any x ∈N(R), we have P(Si|x) ≥2
3 −1
6 = 1
2. We can now lower bound the numerator in the RHS
of Equation (29) as:
Pr
x∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ,ξ′∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si ∧x + ξ′ /∈Si] ≥
Z
x∈N(R)\R
Pj(x)P(Si|x)(1 −P(Si|x))dx
≥1
6
Z
x∈N(R)\R
Pj(x)dx.
(36)
Notice that Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x+ξ ∈Si] ≤1
2 and by the deﬁnition of R, we know
R
x∈R Pj(x)dx ≤3
4, thus
Z
x∈R
Pj(x)dx ≤3
4 ≤3
Z
x/∈R
Pj(x)dx.
(37)
Combine Equation (34), Equation (36) and Equation (37) gives:
Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ,ξ′∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si ∧x + ξ′ /∈Si]
Prx∼Pj,ξ∼Bσ[x + ξ ∈Si]
≥1
36
R
x∈N(R)\R Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx
min{
R
x∈R Pj(x)dx,
R
x∈R Pj(x)dx}.
(38)
Notice that (using the deﬁnition of surface area (Guggenheimer, 1977, chapter 4))
lim
σ→0+
1
σ ·
R
x∈N(R)\R Pj(x)P(Si|x)dx
min{
R
x∈R Pj(x)dx,
R
x∈R Pj(x)dx} ≥1
6hPj,
(39)
we have that as σ →0+,
ρm+1
σ
≥
1
216 min
j∈[m] hPj,
(40)
which ﬁnishes the proof.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
C.2
Proof of Theorem 3.11
In this section, we give a proof of Theorem 3.11.
The following lemma shows that the augmented graph for Example 3.10 satisﬁes Assump-
tion 3.6 with some bounded α.
Lemma C.1. In the setting of Theorem 3.11, the data distribution satisﬁes Assumption 3.6 with α ≤
1
poly(d′).
Proof of Lemma C.1. For any z ∼N(µi, 1
d′ · Id′×d′) and any j ̸= i, by the tail bound of gaussian
distribution we have
Pr
z∼N(µi, 1
d′ ·Id′×d′)

(z −µi)⊤

µj −µi
∥µj −µi∥2

≲
√log d
√
d′

≥1 −
1
poly(d).
Also, for ξ ∼N(0, 1
d · Id×d), when σ ≤
1
√
d we have
Pr
ξ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id′×d′)

∥ξ∥2 ≲
√log d
√
d

≥1 −
1
poly(d).
Notice that
Q−1(Q(z) + ξ) −z

2 ≤κ ∥ξ∥, we can set ∥µi −µj∥≳κ
√log d
√
d . Therefore, when
∥µi −µj∥≳κ
√log d
√
d′
we can combine the above two cases and have
Pr
z∼N(µi, 1
d′ ·Id′×d′),ξ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id′×d′)
 Pi(z) > Pj(Q−1(Q(z) + ξ))

≥1 −
1
poly(d).
Since r ≤d, we have
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)(y(x) ̸= y(¯x)) ≥1 −
1
poly(d).
We use the following lemma to give a lower bound for the sparest m-partition of the augmen-
tation graph in Example 3.10.
Lemma C.2. In the setting of Theorem 3.11, for any k′ > r and τ > 0, we have
ρk′ ≥cτ/κ
18 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

,
where
cσ := σ · Φ−1
d (2
3)
with Φd(z) := Prξ∼N(0, 1
dId×d)(∥ξ∥2 ≤z), and
cτ/κ := min
p∈[0, 3
4]
Φ(Φ−1(p) + τ
√
d/κ)
p
−1
with Φ(z) :=
R z
−∞
e−u2/2
√
2π du.
The proof of Lemma C.2 can be found in Section C.3. Now we give the proof of Example 3.11.
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Proof of Theorem 3.11. The result on α is directly from Lemma C.1. By concentration inequality, there
must exists some universal constant C > 0 such that for any d ≥C, we have 1 −Φd(
q
3
2) ≤1
3.
When this happens, we have Φ−1
d (2
3) ≤
q
3
2. Since for d ≤C we can just treat d as constant, we have
Φ−1
d (2
3) ≲1. Set τ = σ/d in Lemma C.2, we have ρk′ ≳
σ
κ
√
d. Set k′ = ⌊k/2⌋, we apply Theorem 3.8
and get the bound we need.
C.3
Proof of Lemma C.2
In this section we give a proof for Lemma C.2. We ﬁrst introduce the following claim which
states that for a given subset of augmented data, any two data close in L2 norm cannot have a very
different chance of being augmented into this set.
Claim C.3. In the setting of Theorem 3.11, given a set S ⊆Rd.
If x ∈Rd satisﬁes Pr(S|x) :=
Pr˜x∼A(·|x)(˜x ∈S) ≥2
3. Then, for any x′ such that ∥x −x′∥2 ≤τ, we have
Pr(S|x′) ≥1
3 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2

,
where
cσ := σ · Φ−1
d (2
3),
with Φd(z) := Prξ∼N(0, 1
d·Id×d)(∥ξ∥2 ≤z).
Proof of Claim C.3. By the deﬁnition of augmentation, we know
Pr(S|x) = Eξ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id×d) [1 [x + ξ ∈S]] .
By the deﬁnition of cσ, we have
Pr
ξ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id×d)
(∥ξ∥2 ≤cσ) = 2
3.
Since Pr(S|x) ≥2
3 by assumption, we have
Eξ∼N(0, σ2
d ·Id×d) [P(S|x + ξ) · 1 [∥ξ∥2 ≤cσ]] ≥1
3.
Now we can bound the quanity of our interest:
Pr(S|x′) =
1
(2πσ2/d)d/2
Z
ξ
e−
∥ξ∥2
2
2σ2/d P(S|x′ + ξ)dξ
=
1
(2πσ2/d)d/2
Z
ξ
e−∥ξ+x−x′∥2
2
2σ2/d
P(S|x + ξ)dξ
≥
1
(2πσ2/d)d/2
Z
ξ
e−∥ξ+x−x′∥2
2
2σ2/d
P(S|x + ξ) · 1 [∥ξ∥2 ≤cσ] dξ
≥
1
(2πσ2/d)d/2
Z
ξ
e−
2cστ+τ2+∥ξ∥2
2
2σ2/d
P(S|x + ξ) · 1 [∥ξ∥2 ≤cσ] dξ
= e−2cστ+τ2
2σ2/d
· Eξ∼N(0, σ2
d Id×d) [P(S|x + ξ) · 1 [∥ξ∥2 ≤cσ]]
≥1
3 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

.
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
We now give the proof of Lemma C.2.
Proof of Lemma C.2. Let S1, · · · , Sk′ be the disjoint sets that gives ρk′ in Deﬁnition 3.4. First we notice
that when k′ > r, there must exist t ∈[k′] such that for all i ∈[r], we have
Pr
x∼Pi,˜x∼A(·|x)(˜x ∈St) ≤1
2.
(41)
WLOG, we assume t = 1. So we know that
ρk′ = max
i∈[k′] φG(Si) ≥φG(S1) ≥min
j∈[r]
Ex∼Pj [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))]
Ex∼Pj [Pr(S1|x)]
,
(42)
where
Pr(S|x) :=
Pr
˜x∼A(·|x)(˜x ∈S).
WLOG, we assume j = 1 minimizes the RHS of Equation (42), so we only need to prove
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))]
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)]
≥cτ/κ
18 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

.
We deﬁne the following set
R :=

x
 Pr(S1|x) ≥2
3

.
Notice that
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)] =
Z
x
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx
=
Z
x∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx +
Z
x/∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx.
(43)
We can consider the following two cases.
Case 1:
R
x/∈R P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx ≥1
2Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)].
This is the easy case because we have
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))] ≥
Z
x/∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))dx
≥1
3
Z
x/∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx
≥1
6Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)] .
Case 2:
R
x∈R P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx ≥1
2Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)].
Deﬁne neighbourhood of R as
N(R) :=

x
 ∥x −a∥2 ≤τ for some a ∈R

.
We have
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))] ≥
Z
x∈N(R)\R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))dx
≥1
9 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

·
Z
x∈N(R)\R
P1(x)dx,
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
where the second inequality is by Claim C.3. Notice that
Z
x∈R
P1(x)dx ≤3
2
Z
x∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx ≤3
2
Z
x
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx ≤3
4,
where we use Equation (41). Deﬁne set eR := Q−1(R) be the set in the ambient space corresponding
to R. Deﬁne
e
N( eR) :=

x′ ∈Rd′
x′ −a

2 ≤τ
κ for some a ∈eR

Due to Q being κ-bi-lipschitz, it is easy to see e
N( eR) ⊆Q−1 (N(R)). According to the Gaussian
isoperimetric inequality (Bobkov et al., 1997), we have
Z
x∈N(R)\R
P1(x)dx ≥cτ/κ
Z
x∈R
P1(x)dx,
where
cτ/κ :=
min
0≤p≤3/4
Φ(Φ−1(p) + τ
√
d/κ)
p
−1,
with Φ(·) is the Gaussian CDF function deﬁned as
Φ(z) :=
Z z
−∞
e−u2/2
√
2π du.
So we have
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))] ≥cτ/κ
9
· exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

·
Z
x∈R
P1(x)dx
≥cτ/κ
9
· exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

·
Z
x∈R
P1(x) Pr(S1|x)dx
≥cτ/κ
18 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

· Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)] .
By Equation (43), either case 1 or case 2 holds. Combining case 1 and case 2, we have
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)(1 −Pr(S1|x))]
Ex∼P1 [Pr(S1|x)]
≥min
1
6, cτ/κ
18 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

= cτ/κ
18 · exp

−2cστ + τ 2
2σ2/d

.
D
Proofs for Section 4
D.1
Proof of Theorem 4.1
We restate the empirical spectral contrastive loss deﬁned in Section 4 as follows:
Deﬁnition D.1 (Empirical spectral contrastive loss). Consider a dataset b
X = {¯x1, ¯x2, · · · , ¯xn} contain-
ing n data points i.i.d. sampled from PX . Let ˆPX be the uniform distribution over b
X. Let ˆP¯x,¯x′ be the
uniform distribution over data pairs (¯xi, ¯xj) where i ̸= j. We deﬁne the empirical spectral contrastive loss
of a feature extractor f as
bLn(f) := −2E
¯x∼ˆ
PX ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x)
h
f(x)⊤f(x′)
i
+ E
(¯x,¯x′)∼ˆ
P¯x,¯x′ ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x′)

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
The following claim shows that bLn(f) is an unbiased estimator of population spectral con-
trastive loss.
Claim D.2. bLn(f) is an unbiased estimator of L(f), i.e.,
E b
X
h
bLn(f)
i
= L(f).
Proof. This is because
E b
X
h
bLn(f)
i
= −2 · E b
X

E
¯x∼ˆ
PX ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x)
h
f(x)⊤f(x′)
i
+ E b
X

E
(¯x,¯x′)∼ˆ
P¯x,¯x′ ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x′)

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
= −2E
¯x∼PX ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x)
h
f(x)⊤f(x′)
i
+ E
¯x∼PX ,¯x′∼PX ,
x∼A(·|¯x),x′∼A(·|¯x′)

f(x)⊤f(x′)
2
= L(f).
To make use of the Radmacher complexity theory, we need to write the empirical loss as the
sum of i.i.d. terms, which is achieved by the following sub-sampling scheme:
Deﬁnition D.3. Given dataset b
X, we sample a subset of tuples as follows: ﬁrst sample a permutation
π : [n] →[n], then we sample tuples S = {(zi, z+
i , z′
i)}n/2
i=1 as follows:
zi ∼A(·|¯xπ(2i−1)),
z+
i ∼A(·|¯xπ(2i−1)),
z′
i ∼A(·|¯xπ(2i)).
We deﬁne the following loss on S:
bLS(f) :=
1
n/2
n/2
X
i=1

f(zi)⊤f(z′
i)
2
−2f(zi)⊤f(z+
i )

.
It is easy to see that bLS(f) is an unbiased estimator of bLn(f):
Claim D.4. For given b
X, if we sample S as above, we have:
ES
h
bLS(f)
i
= bLf(.)
Proof. This is obvious by the deﬁnition of bLS(f) and bLn(f).
The following lemma reveals the relationship between the Rademacher complexity of feature
extractors and the Rademacher complexity of the loss deﬁned on tuples:
Lemma D.5. Let F be a hypothesis class of feature extractors from X to Rk. Assume ∥f(x)∥∞≤κ for all
x ∈X. For i ∈[k], deﬁne fi : X →R be the function such that fi(x) is the i-th dimension of f(x). Let Fi
be the hypothesis containing fi for all f ∈F. For n ∈Z+, let bRn(Fi) be the maximal possible empirical
Rademacher complexity of Fi over n data:
bRn(Fi) :=
max
{x1,x2,··· ,xn} Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(xj)



,
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
where x1, x2, · · · , xm are in X, and σ is a uniform random vector in {−1, 1}n.
Then, the empirical
Rademacher complexity on any n tuples {(zi, z+
i , z′
i)}n
i=1 can be bounded by
Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj

f(zj)⊤f(z′
j)
2
−2f(zj)⊤f(z+
j )



≤(16k2κ2 + 16kκ) · max
i∈[k]
bRn(Fi).
Proof.
Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj

f(zj)⊤f(z′
j)
2
−2f(zj)⊤f(z+
j )




≤Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj

f(zj)⊤f(z′
j)
2



+ 2Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjf(zj)⊤f(z+
j )




≤2kκEσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjf(zj)⊤f(z′
j)



+ 2Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjf(zj)⊤f(z+
j )




≤(2k2κ + 2k)
max
z1,z2,··· ,zn
z′
1,z′
2,··· ,z′n
max
i∈[k] Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(zj)fi(z′
j)



,
here the second inequality is by Talagrand’s lemma.
Notice that for any z1, z2 · · · zn and
z′
1, z′
2, · · · , z′
n in X and any i ∈[k] we have
Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(zj)fi(z′
j)




≤1
2Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj
 fi(zj) + fi(z′
j)
2



+ 1
2Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj
 fi(zj) −fi(z′
j)
2




≤4κEσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(zj)



+ 4κEσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(z′
j)



,
where the ﬁrst inequaltiy is by Talagrand’s lemma. Combine these two equations and we get:
Eσ

sup
f∈F

1
n
n
X
j=1
σj

f(zj)⊤f(z′
j)
2
−2f(zj)⊤f(z+
j )




≤(16k2κ2 + 16kκ)
max
z1,z2,··· ,zn max
i∈[k] Eσ

sup
fi∈Fi

1
n
n
X
j=1
σjfi(zj)



.
Proof of Theorem 4.1. By Claim D.2 and Claim D.4, we know that ES[ bLS(f)] = L(f), where S is sam-
pled by ﬁrst sampling b
X then sample S according to Deﬁnition D.3. Notice that when b
X contains
n i.i.d. samples natural data, the set of random tuples S contains n i.i.d tuples. Therefore, we can
apply generalization bound with Rademacher complexity to get a uniform convergence bound. In
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
particular, by Lemma D.5 and notice the fact that

f(zj)⊤f(z′
j)
2
−2f(zj)⊤f(z+
j ) always take val-
ues in range [−2kκ2, 2kκ2 +k2κ4], we apply standard generalization analysis based on Rademacher
complexity and get: with probability at least 1 −δ2/4 over the randomness of b
X and S, we have for
any f ∈F,
L(f) ≤bLS(f) + (32k2κ2 + 32kκ) max
i∈[k]
bRnpre/2(Fi) + (4kκ2 + k2κ4) ·
s
4 log 2/δ
npre
.
(44)
This means with probability at least 1 −δ/2 over random b
X, we have: with probability at least
1 −δ/2 over random tuples S conditioned on b
X, Equation (44) holds. Since both L(f) and bLnpre(f)
take value in range [−2kκ2, 2kκ2 + k2κ4], we have: with probability at least 1 −δ/2 over random b
X,
we have for any f ∈F,
L(f) ≤bLnpre(f) + (32k2κ2 + 32kκ) · max
i∈[k]
bRnpre/2(Fi) + (4kκ2 + k2κ4) ·
 s
4 log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
2
!
.
Since negating the functions in a function class doesn’t change its Rademacher complexity, we also
have the other direction: with probability at least 1 −δ/2 over random b
X, we have for any f ∈F,
L(f) ≥bLnpre(f) −(32k2κ2 + 32kκ) · max
i∈[k]
bRnpre/2(Fi) + (4kκ2 + k2κ4) ·
 s
4 log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
2
!
.
Combine them together we get the excess risk bound: with probability at least 1 −δ, we have
L( ˆf) ≤L(f∗
F) + (64k2κ2 + 64kκ) · max
i∈[k]
bRnpre/2(Fi) + (8kκ2 + 2k2κ4) ·
 s
4 log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
2
!
,
where ˆf is minimizer of bLnpre(f) in F and f∗
F is minimizer of L(f) in F. Set c1 = 64k2κ2 + 64kκ and
c2 = 16kκ2 + 4k2κ4 and notice that maxi∈[k] bRnpre/2(Fi) = bRnpre/2(F) ﬁnishes the proof.
D.2
Generalization bound for spectral contrastive learning with deep neural networks
In this section, we examplify Theorem 4.1 with the norm-contralled Rademacher complexity
bound introduced in (Golowich et al., 2018), which gives the following theorem.
Theorem D.6. Assume X is a subset of Euclidean space Rd and ∥x∥2 ≤Cx for any x ∈X. Let F be a
hypothesis class of norm-contralled l-layer deep neural networks deﬁned as
{x →Pκ(Wlσ(Wl−1σ(· · · σ(W1x)))) : ∥Wi∥F ≤Cw,i}
where σ(·) is element-wise ReLU activation, Pκ(·) is element-wise projection to interval [−κ, κ] for some
κ > 0, Cw,i is the norm bound of the i-th layer, Wl has k rows and W1 has d columns. Then, with probability
at least 1 −δ over randomness of a dataset with size 2npre, we have
L( ˆf) ≤L∗
F + c1 · CxCw
√
l
√npre
+ c2 ·
 s
log 1/δ
npre
+ δ
!
,
where ˆf is the minimizer of bL2npre(f) in F, L∗
F is the minimal L(f) achievable by any function f ∈F,
Cw := Ql
i=1 Cw,i, constants c1 ≲k2κ2 + kκ and c2 ≲kκ2 + k2κ4.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
Proof of Theorem D.6. Consider the following hypothesis class of real-valued neural networks:
Freal ≜
n
x →c
Wlσ(Wl−1σ(· · · σ(W1x))) : ∥Wi∥F ≤Cw,i
o
where σ(·) is element-wise ReLU activation and Cw,i is the norm bound of the i-th layer deﬁned in
the theorem, Wl has k rows and c
W1 is a vector. By Theorem 1 of (Golowich et al., 2018), we have
bRnpre (Freal) ≤Cx(
p
2 log(2)l + 1)Cw
√npre
.
Let the projection version of this hyposis class be:
Freal+proj ≜
n
x →Pκ(c
Wlσ(Wl−1σ(· · · σ(W1x)))) : ∥Wi∥F ≤Cw,i
o
,
where Pκ(·) projects a real number into interval [−Cw, Cw]. Notice that Pκ(·) is 1-Lipschitz, by
Telegrand’s lemma we have
bRnpre
 Freal+proj

≤Cx(
p
2 log(2)l + 1)Cw
√npre
.
For each i ∈[k], deﬁne function fi : X →R such that fi(x) is the i-th dimension of f(x), deﬁne
Fi be the hypothesis class including all fi for f ∈F. Then when F is the composition of deep neural
networks and projection function as deﬁned in the theorem, it is obvious to see that Fi = Freal+proj
for all i ∈[k]. Therefore, by Theorem 4.1 we have
L( ˆf) ≤L∗
F + c1 · Cx(
p
2 log(2)l + 1)Cw
√npre
+ c2 ·
 s
log 2/δ
npre
+ δ
!
,
and absorbing the constants into c1 ﬁnishes the proof.
D.3
Proof of Theorem 4.2
In this section we give the proof of Theorem 4.2. We will ﬁrst prove the following theorem that
characterize the error propagation from pre-training to the downstream task.
Theorem D.7 (Error propagation from pre-training to the downstream task). Assume representation
dimension k ≥4r + 2, Assumption 3.6 holds for α > 0 and Assumption 3.7 holds. Recall γi be the i-
th largest eigenvalue of the normalized adjacency matrix. Then, for any ϵ > 0 and ˆfemp ∈F such that
L( ˆfemp) < L(f∗
pop) + ϵ, we have:
E( ˆfemp) ≲
α
ρ2
⌊k/2⌋
· log k + kϵ
∆2γ
,
where ∆γ := γ⌊3k/4⌋−γk is the eigenvalue gap between the ⌊3k/4⌋-th and the k-th eigenvalue. Furthermore,
there exists a linear head bB ∈Rk×r that achieves this error and has norm bound
 bB

F ≤2(k + 1)
1 −λk
.
(45)
We ﬁrst introduce the following deﬁnitions of ϵ-optimal minimizers of matrix approximation
loss and population spectral contrastive loss:
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
Deﬁnition D.8. We say a function ˆfmf is ϵ-optimal minimizer of matrix approximation loss Lmf if
Lmf( bFmf) ≤min
F
Lmf(F) + ϵ,
where bFmf is ˆfmf written in the matrix form. We say a function ˆf is ϵ-optimal minimizer of spectral con-
trastive loss L if
L( ˆf) ≤min
f
L(f) + ϵ.
We introduce the following generalized version of Theorem B.3, which captures the main ef-
fects of error in the representation.
Theorem D.9. [Generalization of Theorem B.3] Assume the set of augmented data X is ﬁnite. Let λi be the
i-th smallest eigenvalue of the normalize laplacian matrix. Let ˆf ∈arg minf:X→Rk be a ϵ-optimal minimizer
of the spectral contrastive loss function L(f) with k ∈Z+. Then, for any labeling function ˆy : X →[r]
there exists a linear probe bB ∈Rr×k with norm bound
 bB

F ≤2(k+1)
1−λk such that
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
⃗y(¯x) −bB ˆfemp(x)

2
2

≲min
1≤k′≤k
 φˆy
λk′+1
+
k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

+ ∆(y, ˆy),
and
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲min
1≤k′≤k
 φˆy
λk′+1
+
k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

+ ∆(y, ˆy),
where φˆy and ∆(y, ˆy) are deﬁned in Equations 18 and 19 respectively.
The proof of Theorem D.9 is deferred to Section D.4.
Now we are ready to prove Theorem 4.2 using Theorem D.9.
Proof of Theorem D.7. In Theorem D.9 we let k′ = ⌊3
4k⌋on the RHS of the bound and get: for any
ˆy : X →[r] there exists bB ∈Rr×k such that
Pr
x∼PX ,˜x∼A(·|x)

g ˆf, bB(˜x) ̸= y(x)

≲
φˆy
λ⌊3
4k⌋+1
+
kϵ
(λk+1 −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2 + ∆(y, ˆy).
Let S1, S2, · · · , Sr be the partition of X induced by the classiﬁer g in Assumption 3.6. Deﬁne func-
tion ˆy : X →[r] as follows: for an augmented datapoint x ∈X, we use function ˆy(x) to represent
the index of set that x is in, i.e., x ∈Sˆy(x). Then by Lemma B.5 we have φˆy ≤2α and ∆(y, ˆy) ≤α.
In Lemma B.4 let (1 + ζ)t = ⌊3
4k⌋+ 1 and t = ⌊k
2⌋, then there is ζ ≥0.5, so we have: there exists a
partition S1, · · · , S⌊k
2 ⌋⊂X such that φG(Si) ≲
q
λ⌊3
4k⌋+1 log (k) for ∀i ∈[⌊k
2⌋]. By Deﬁnition 3.4, we
have ρ⌊k
2 ⌋≲
q
λ⌊3
4k⌋+1 log (k), which leads to
1
λ⌊3
4 k⌋+1 ≲log(k)
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋. So we have
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲
α
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋
· log(k) +
kϵ
(λk+1 −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2
≲
α
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋
· log(k) +
kϵ
(λk −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2 .
Notice that by the deﬁnition of ensembled linear probe predictor, ¯g ˆf, bB(¯x) ̸= y(¯x) happens
only if more than half of the augmentations of ¯x predicts differently from y(¯x), so we have
Pr¯x∼PX

¯g ˆf, bB ̸= y(¯x)

≤2 Pr¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= y(¯x)

which ﬁnishes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 4.2. Theorem 4.2 is a direct corollary of Theorem 4.1 and Theorem D.7.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
D.4
Proof of Theorem D.9
In this section, we give the proof for Theorem D.9.
Lemma D.10 (Generalization of Lemma B.8). Let f : X →Rk be a feature extractor, matrix F ∈RN×k
be such that its x-th row is √wx · f(x). Then, F is an ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf(F) if and only if f is an
ϵ-optimal minimizer of the population spectral contrastive loss L(f).
Proof of Lemma D.10. The proof follows the proof of Lemma B.8.
We will use the following two lemmas about ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf:
Lemma D.11. Let λi be the i-th minimal eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian matrix L with corrsponding
unit-norm eigenvector vi. Let F ∈RN×k be an ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf. Let Πfvi be the projection of vi
onto the column span of F. Then, there exists vector b ∈Rk with norm bound ∥b∥≤∥F∥F /(1 −λi) such
that
∥Πfvi −Fb∥2
2 ≤
ϵ
(1 −λi)2 .
(46)
Furthermore, the norm of F is bounded by
∥F∥2
F ≤2(k + ϵ).
(47)
Proof of Lemma D.11. Since columns of A −ΠfA and columns of ΠfA −FF ⊤are in orthogonal
subspaces, we have
A −FF ⊤
2
F =
A −ΠfA
2
F +
ΠfA −FF ⊤
2
F .
(48)
On one hand, since ΠfA is a rank-k matrix, we know that
A −ΠfA
2
F ≥minF Lmf(F). On the
other hand, by the deﬁnition of ϵ-optimal minimizer, we have
A −FF ⊤2
F ≤minF Lmf(F) + ϵ.
Thus, we have
ΠfA −FF ⊤
2
F ≤ϵ.
(49)
Since A = PN
i=1(1 −λi)viv⊤
i , we have vi =
1
1−λi Avi. Thus,
Πfvi =
1
1 −λi
Πf(Avi) =
1
1 −λi
FF ⊤vi +
1
1 −λi
(ΠfA −FF ⊤)vi.
(50)
Let b =
1
1−λi F ⊤vi, we have
∥Πfvi −Fb∥2
2 =
1
(1 −λi)2
(ΠfA −FF ⊤)vi

2
2
(51)
≤
1
(1 −λi)2
ΠfA −FF ⊤
2
F
(52)
≤
ϵ
(1 −λi)2 .
(53)
To bound the norm of F, we ﬁrst notice that
ΠfA
2
F = Tr(A
2Πf) ≤Tr(Πf) = k,
(54)
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
where the inequality uses that fact that A
2 has operator norm at most 1. Combine this result with
ΠfA −FF ⊤2
F ≤ϵ we have
FF ⊤
F ≤
√
k + √ϵ.
(55)
Since FF ⊤has rank at most k, we can write its SVD deocmposition as FF ⊤= UΣU⊤where
U ∈RN×k and Σ ∈Rk × k. As a result, we have
∥F∥2
F = Tr(FF ⊤) = Tr(Σ) ≤
√
k
p
Tr(Σ2) =
√
k
FF ⊤
F ≤k +
√
kϵ ≤2(k + ϵ).
(56)
Lemma D.12. Let λi be the i-th minimal eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian matrix L with corrsponding
unit-norm eigenvector vi. Let F ∈RN×k be an ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf. Let Π⊥
f vi be the projection of vi
onto the subspace orthogonal to the column span of F. Then, for i ≤k we have
Π⊥
f vi

2
2 ≤
ϵ
(λk+1 −λi)2 .
Proof. Recall normalized adjacency matrix A = I −L. We use Ai to denote the i-th column of
A. We use bA to denote matrix FF ⊤and bAi to denote the i-th column of bA. Let z1, · · · , zk be unit-
norm orthogonal vectors in the column span of F. Since the column span of bA is the same as the
column span of F, we know columns of bA are in span{z1, · · · , zk}. Let zk+1, · · · , zN be unit-norm
orthogonal vectors such that together with z1, · · · , zk they form an orthonormal basis of RN. We
use Πf and Π⊥
f to denote matrices Pk
j=1 zjz⊤
j and PN
j=k+1 zjz⊤
j respectively, then for any vector
v ∈RN, vectors Πfv and Π⊥
f v are the projections of v onto the column span of F and its orthogonal
space respectively.
We ﬁrst give a lower bound of Lmf(F) as follows:
Lmf(F) =
A −bA

2
F =
N
X
j=1
Aj −bAj

2
2 ≥
N
X
j=1
Aj −ΠfAj
2
2
=
N
X
j=1
Aj −
 k
X
t=1
ztz⊤
t
!
Aj

2
2
=
N
X
j=1

 
N
X
t=k+1
ztz⊤
t
!
Aj

2
2
=

 
N
X
t=k+1
ztz⊤
t
!
A

2
F
=
Π⊥
f A

2
F .
where the ﬁrst equality is by deﬁnition of Lmf(F), the second equality is by writing the Frobenius
norm square as the sum of column norm square, the inequality is because bAj must be in the span of
z1, · · · , zk while ΠfAj is the vector in this span that is closest to Aj, the third equality is writing the
projection function in the matrix form, the fourth equality is because z1, · · · zd are an orthonormal
basis, the ﬁfth equality is rewriting to Frobenius norm, and the last equality is by deﬁnition of Π⊥
f .
Notice that Π⊥
f A

2
F = Tr

A
⊤Π⊥
f
⊤Π⊥
f A

= Tr

A
⊤Π⊥
f A

= Tr

AA
⊤Π⊥
f

.
We can rewrite the above lower bound as
Lmf(F) ≥Tr

AA
⊤Π⊥
f

= Tr


N
X
j=1
(1 −λj)2vjv⊤
j
N
X
t=k+1
ztz⊤
t

=
N
X
j=1
N
X
t=k+1
(1 −λj)2⟨vj, zt⟩2.
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
We deﬁne variable Sj ≜Pj
t=1
Pd
l=k+1⟨vt, zl⟩2 for any j ∈[N]. Also denote λd+1 = 1. We have
the following equality:
N
X
j=1
N
X
t=k+1
(1 −λj)2⟨vj, zt⟩2 =
N
X
j=1
 (1 −λj)2 −(1 −λj+1)2
Sj.
Notice that Sj ≥0 and also when i ≤j ≤k, we have Sj ≥
Π⊥
f vi

2
2, we have
N
X
j=1
N
X
t=k+1
(1 −λj)2⟨vj, zt⟩2 ≥
 (1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 Π⊥
f vi

2
2 +
N
X
j=k+1
 (1 −λj)2 −(1 −λj+1)2
Sj,
where we replace every Sj with 0 when j < k, replace Sj with
Π⊥
f vi

2
2 when i ≤j ≤k, and keep
Sj when j ≥k + 1. Now notice that
SN =
N
X
t=1
N
X
l=k+1
⟨vt, zl⟩2 =
N
X
l=k+1
N
X
t=1
⟨vt, zl⟩2 =
N
X
l=k+1
∥zl∥2
2 = N −k,
and also
Sj+1 −Sj =
N
X
l=k+1
⟨vj+1, zl⟩2 ≤
N
X
l=1
⟨vj+1, zl⟩2 = 1,
there must be Sj ≥j −k when j ≥k + 1. So we have
N
X
j=1
N
X
t=k+1
(1 −λj)2⟨vj, zt⟩2
≥
 (1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 Π⊥
f vi

2
2 +
N
X
j=k+1
 (1 −λj)2 −(1 −λj+1)2
(j −k)
=
 (1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 Π⊥
f vi

2
2 +
N
X
j=k+1
(1 −λj)2
=
 (1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 Π⊥
f vi

2
2 +
min
F∈RN×k Lmf(F),
where the last equality is by Eckart–Young–Mirsky Theorem. So we know
Lmf(F) ≥
 (1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 Π⊥
f vi

2
2 +
min
F∈RN×k Lmf(F),
(57)
which implies that
Π⊥
f vi

2
2 ≤
ϵ
(1 −λi)2 −(1 −λk+1)2 ≤
ϵ
(λk+1 −λi)2 .
(58)
The following lemma generalizes Lemma B.6.
Lemma D.13 (Generalization of Lemma B.6). Let L be the normalized Laplacian matrix of graph G =
(X, w), where |X| = N. Let f : X →Rk be an ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf(f). Let F be the matrix form of
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
f and Fi is the i-th column of F. Let R(u) := u⊤Lu
u⊤u be the Rayleigh quotient of a vector u ∈RN . Then, for
any k ∈Z+ such that k < N, there exists a vector b ∈Rk such that
∥u −Fb∥2
2 ≤min
1≤k′≤k
3R(u)
λk′+1
+
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

∥u∥2
2 .
Furethermore, the norm of b is upper bounded by
∥b∥2 ≤2(k + 1)
1 −λk
∥u∥2 .
(59)
Proof. Let k′ be the choice that minimizes the right hand side. We use pv(u) to denote the projection
of u onto the span of v1, · · · , vk′. We denote the coefﬁcients as pv(u) = Pk′
i=1 ρivi. For every i ∈[k′],
let bi be the vector in Lemma D.11. Deﬁne vector b = Pk′
i=1 ρibi.
We use pv,f(u) to denote the projection of pv(u) onto the span of f1, · · · , fk. Then we know that
∥u −Fb∥2
2 ≤3 ∥u −pv(u)∥2
2 + 3 ∥pv(u) −pv,f(u)∥2
2 + 3 ∥pv,f(u) −Fb∥2
2 .
(60)
By the proof of Lemma B.6, we know that
∥u −pv(u)∥2
2 ≤R(u)
λk′+1
∥u∥2
2 .
(61)
For the second term, we have
∥pv(u) −pvf(u)∥2
2 =
Π⊥
f pv(u)

2
2
=

k′
X
i=1
Π⊥
f viv⊤
i u

2
2
≤
 k′
X
i=1
Π⊥
f vi

2
2
!
·
 k′
X
i=1
(v⊤
i u)2
!
≤
k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2 ∥u∥2
2 ,
(62)
where the ﬁrst inequality if by Cauchy–Schwarz inequality and the second inequality if by
Lemma D.12.
For the third term, we have
∥pv,f(u) −Fb∥2
2 =

k′
X
i=1
ρi(Πfvi −Fbi)

2
2
≤k′
k′
X
i=1
ρ2
i ∥Πfvi −Fbi∥2
2
≤
k′ϵ
(1 −λk′)2 ∥u∥2
2 ,
(63)
where the ﬁrst inequality is by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and the second inequality is by
Lemma D.11. Plugging Equation (61), Equation (62), and Equation (63) into Equation (60) ﬁnishes
the proof.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
To bound the norm of b, we use Lemma D.11 and have
∥b∥2
2 =

k′
X
i=1
ρibi

2
2
≤k′
k′
X
i=1
ρ2
i ∥bi∥2
2 ≤
k′ ∥u∥2
2
(1 −λk′)2 ∥F∥2
F ≤2k′(k + 1)
(1 −λk′)2 ∥u∥2
2 .
(64)
Now we prove Theorem D.9 using the above lemmas.
Proof of Theorem D.9. Let bF ∈RN×k be such that its x-th row is √wx · ˆf(x). By Lemma D.10, bF is an
ϵ-optimal minimizer of Lmf(F).
For each i ∈[r], we deﬁne the function ui(x) = 1 [ˆy(x) = i] · √wx. Let u : X →Rk be the
function such that u(x) has ui at the i-th dimension. By Lemma D.13, there exists a vector bi ∈Rk
such that
ui −bFbi

2
2 ≤min
1≤k′≤k
3R(ui)
λk′+1
+
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

∥ui∥2
2
Let matrices U = [u1, · · · , ur] and bB⊤= [b1, · · · , br]. We sum the above equation over all i ∈[r] and
get
U −bF bB⊤
2
F ≤
r
X
i=1
min
1≤k′≤k
3R(ui)
λk′+1
+
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

∥ui∥2
2
≤min
1≤k′≤k
r
X
i=1
3R(ui)
λk′+1
∥ui∥2
2 +
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2 ∥ui∥2
2

.
(65)
Notice that
r
X
i=1
R(ui) ∥ui∥2
2 =
r
X
i=1
1
2φˆy
i
X
x∈X
wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i]
= 1
2
r
X
i=1
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

(ˆy(x) = i ∧ˆy(x′) ̸= i) or (ˆy(x) ̸= i ∧ˆy(x′) = i)

= 1
2
X
x,x′∈X
wxx′ · 1

ˆy(x) ̸= ˆy(x′)

= 1
2φˆy,
(66)
where the ﬁrst equality is by Claim B.7. On the other hand, we have
r
X
i=1
∥ui∥2
2 =
r
X
i=1
X
x∈X
wx · 1 [ˆy(x) = i] =
X
x∈X
wx = 1.
(67)
Plugging Equation (66) and Equation (67) into Equation (65) gives us
U −bF bB⊤
2
F ≤min
1≤k′≤k
 3φˆy
2λk′+1
+
3k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

.
Notice that by deﬁnition of u(x), we know that prediction g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= ˆy(x) only happens if
u(x) −bB ˆf(x)

2
2 ≥wx
2 . Hence we have
X
x∈X
1
2wx · 1
h
g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= ˆy(x)
i
≤
X
x∈X
u(x) −bB ˆf(x)

2
2 =
U −bF bB⊤
2
F .
47

===== PAGE 48 =====
Now we are ready to bound the error rate on X:
Pr
x∼X(g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= ˆy(x)) =
X
x∈X
wx · 1
h
g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= ˆy(x)
i
≤2 ·
U −ˆf bB⊤
2
F ≤min
1≤k′≤k
 3φˆy
λk′+1
+
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

.
Here for the equality we are using the fact that Pr(x) = wx. We ﬁnish the proof by noticing that by
the deﬁnition of ∆(y, ˆy):
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≤
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆf, bB(x) ̸= ˆy(x)

+
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x) (y(¯x) ̸= ˆy(x))
≤min
1≤k′≤k
 3φˆy
λk′+1
+
6k′ϵ
(λk+1 −λk′)2

+ ∆(y, ˆy).
The norm of bB can be bounded using Lemma D.13 as:
 bB

F ≤2(k + 1)
1 −λk
v
u
u
t
r
X
i=1
∥ui∥2
2 = 2(k + 1)
1 −λk
.
(68)
E
Proofs for Section 4.2
In this section we give the proof of Theorem 4.3.
Proof of Theorem 4.3. Let ˆfemp be the minimizer of the empirical spectral contrastive loss. Let ϵ =
L( ˆfemp) −L(f∗
pop). We abuse notation and use yi to denote y(¯xi), and let zi = ˆfemp(xi). We ﬁrst
study the average empirical Rademacher complexity of the capped quadratic loss on a dataset
{(zi, yi)}ndown
i=1 , where (zi, yi) is sampled as in Section 4.2:
bRndown(ℓ) :=E{(zi,yi)}
ndown
i=1
Eσ
"
sup
∥B∥F ≤Ck
1
ndown
"ndown
X
i=1
σiℓ((zi, yi), B)
##
≤2rE{(zi,yi)}
ndown
i=1
Eσ
"
sup
∥b∥2≤Ck
1
ndown
"ndown
X
i=1
σiw⊤zi
##
≤2rCk
s
E[∥zi∥2]
ndown
≤2rCk
s
2(k + ϵ)
ndown
,
where the ﬁrst inequality uses Talagrand’s lemma and the fact that ℓσ is 2-Lipschitz, the second
inequality is by standard Rademacher complexity of linear models, the third inequality is by the
feature norm bound in Lemma D.11.
By Theorem D.9 and follow the proof of Theorem D.7, we know that there exists a linear probe
bB∗with norm bound
 bB∗
F ≤Ck such that
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
h
ℓ

( ˆfemp(x), y(¯x)), bB∗i
≲
α
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋
· log(k) +
kϵ
(λk −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2 .
48

===== PAGE 49 =====
Let bB be the minimizer of Pndown
i=1
ℓ((zi, yi), B) subject to ∥B∥F ≤Ck, then by standard generaliza-
tion bound, we have: with probability at least 1 −δ, we have
E¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)
h
ℓ

( ˆfemp(x), y(¯x)), bB
i
≲
α
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋
· log(k) +
kϵ
(λk −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2 + rCk
√
k + ϵ
√ndown
+
s
log 1/δ
ndown
.
Notice that y(¯x) ̸= g ˆfemp, bB(x) only if ℓ

( ˆfemp(x), y(¯x)), bB

≥1
2, we have that when ϵ < 1 the error
bound
Pr
¯x∼PX ,x∼A(·|¯x)

g ˆfemp, bB(x) ̸= y(¯x)

≲
α
ρ2
⌊k
2 ⌋
· log(k) +
kϵ
(λk −λ⌊3
4k⌋)2 + rCk
√
k
√ndown
+
s
log 1/δ
ndown
.
The result on ¯g ˆfemp, bB naturally follows by the deﬁnition of ¯g. When ϵ > 1 clearly the bound is also
true since LHS is always smaller than 1, so we know that the above bound is true for any ϵ. Plug in
the bound for ϵ from Theorem 4.1 ﬁnishes the proof.
F
Formal statements for population with inﬁnite supports
In the main body of the paper, we make the simplifying assumption that the set of augmented
data X is ﬁnite (but could be exponential in dimension). Although this is a reasonable assumption
given that modern computers store data with ﬁnite bits so the possible number of all data has to
be ﬁnite, one might wonder whether our theory can be generalized to the case where X is inﬁnite
(e.g., the entire Euclidean space Rd for some integer d > 0). In this section, we show that our theory
can be straightforwardly extended to the case when X has inﬁnite supports with some additional
regularity conditions. In fact, almost all proofs remain the same as long as we replace sum by
integral, ﬁnite graph by an inﬁnite graph, adjacency matrix by adjacency operator, and eigenvectors
by the eigenfunctions.
For simplicity, we consider the case when X = Rd is the set of all augmented data.7 The weight
matrix wxx′ now becomes a weight function w : X × X →R. As usual, let w(x, x′) be the marginal
probability of generating the pair x and x′ from a random natural datapoint ¯x ∼PX . Or in other
words, w is the p.d.f. of the joint distribution of a random positive pair. For any u ∈X, deﬁne
the marginal weight function w(u) ≜
R
w(u, z)dz. A sufﬁcient (but not necessary) condition for our
theory to hold is as follows:
Assumption F.1 (Regularity conditions). The distribution w satisﬁes the following conditions:
(i) For any u ∈X, the marginal distribution is well-deﬁned and bouned w(u) =
R
w(u, z)dz < ∞.
(ii) There exists B > 0 such that for every u, v ∈X, the conditional probability with respect to one
variable is upper bounded by the marginal probability of the other variable w(u,v)
w(u) ≤B · w(v).
We note that our bound does not depend on value of B—we only the existence of B for a
qualitative purpose. When the regularity conditions above hold, we will show that there exists an
eigenfunction of the inﬁnite adjacency graph is an analog to the eigenvectors of Laplacian that we
introduced in Section B.
Let L2(Rd) be the set of all L2 integratable functions L2(Rd) ≜{f : Rd →R |
R
f(z)2dz < ∞}.
For functions f, g ∈L2(Rd), deﬁne their inner product as ⟨f, g⟩≜
R
f(z)g(z)dz. Note that ℓ2(Rd) is
a Hilbert space.
7When X is a subset of Rd equipped with a base measure µ, then we will need to replace every dx by dµ in the
formulation below.
49

===== PAGE 50 =====
To generalize the Laplacian matrix and eigenvectors to the inﬁnite-size X setting, we consider
the notions of Laplacian operators and eigenfunctions. Let H : L2(Rd) →L2(Rd) be a linear opera-
tor, a function f ∈L2(Rd) is an eigenfunction of H if H(f)(u) = λf(u) for any u ∈X, where λ ∈R
is the corresponding eigenvalue. We deﬁne the Laplacian operator as L : L2(Rd) →L2(Rd) such
that for every u ∈X and function f ∈L2(Rd), we have
L(f)(u) = f(u) −
Z
w(u, v)
p
w(u)w(v)
f(v)dv.
(69)
The following theorem shows the existence of eigenfunctions of the Laplacian operator.
Theorem F.2 (Existence of Eigenfunctions). When Assumption F.1 is satisﬁed, there exists an orthonor-
mal basis {fi}∞
i=1 of L2(Rd) such that L(fi) = λifi. Furthermore, the eigenvalues satisfy λi ∈[0, 1] and
λi ≤λi+1 for any i ≥0.
Proof of Theorem F.2. Deﬁne kernel function k(u, v) ≜
w(u,v)
√
w(u)w(v), we have
Z
k(u, v)2dudv =
Z
w(u, v)2
w(u)w(v)dudv ≤B
Z
w(u, v)dudv = B < ∞.
(70)
Let I be the identity operator, then L −I is a Hilbert–Schmidt integral operator (Wikipedia contrib-
utors, 2020), so the spectral theorem (Bump, 1998) applies to L −I hence also applies to L. By the
spectral theorem, there exists an orthonormal basis {fi}∞
i=1 of L2(Rd) such that L(fi) = λifi.
Notice that
λi = ⟨fi, L(fi)⟩= ⟨fi, fi⟩−
Z
w(u, v)
p
w(u)w(v)
fi(u)fi(v)dudv.
(71)
On the one hand, since w(u, v) ≥0 and ⟨fi, fi⟩= 1, we have λi ≤1. On the other hand, notice that
by Cauchy-Schwart inequality,
Z
w(u, v)
p
w(u)w(v)
fi(u)fi(v)dudv ≤
sZ
fi(u)2 w(u, v)
w(u) dudv ·
Z
fi(v)2 w(u, v)
w(v) dudv = ⟨fi, fi⟩,
(72)
so λi ≥0, which ﬁnishes the proof.
Given the existence of eigenfunctions guaranteed by Theorem F.2, our results Theorem 3.8,
Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.3 can all be easily generalized to the inﬁnite-size X case following
exactly the same proof. For example, in the context of Lemma 3.2, ux will be replaced by u(x) :
Rd →R which belongs to L2(Rd), and f(x) = w(x)1/2u(x) as a result belongs to L2(w). Let Lmf(f) =
⟨u, Lu⟩L2(Rd) = ⟨f, Lf⟩L2(w). The rest of the derivations follows by replacing the sum in equation (7)
by integral (w.r.t to Lebesgue measure). More details on the normalized Laplacian operator and
spectral clustering can be found in (Schiebinger et al., 2015).
We omit the proof for simplicity.
50
