
===== PAGE 1 =====
VOXELPROMPT: A VISION AGENT FOR END-TO-END
MEDICAL IMAGE ANALYSIS
Andrew Hoopes 1,2, Neel Dey 1,2,3, Victor Butoi 1, John Guttag 1, Adrian V. Dalca 1,2,3
1. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2. Massachusetts General Hospital, 3. Harvard Medical School
ABSTRACT
We present VoxelPrompt, an end-to-end image analysis agent that tackles free-
form radiological tasks. Given any number of volumetric medical images and a
natural language prompt, VoxelPrompt integrates a language model that generates
executable code to invoke a jointly-trained, adaptable vision network. This code
further carries out analytical steps to address practical quantitative aims, such as
measuring the growth of a tumor across visits. The pipelines generated by Vox-
elPrompt automate analyses that currently require practitioners to painstakingly
combine multiple specialized vision and statistical tools.
We evaluate Voxel-
Prompt using diverse neuroimaging tasks and show that it can delineate hundreds
of anatomical and pathological features, measure complex morphological proper-
ties, and perform open-language analysis of lesion characteristics. VoxelPrompt
performs these objectives with an accuracy similar to that of specialist single-
task models for image analysis, while facilitating a broad range of compositional
biomedical workflows.
1
INTRODUCTION
Clinicians and scientists routinely pose complex questions involving specific targets in medical
imaging that extend well beyond simple segmentation or classification tasks. These questions in-
volve multi-step efforts to track the evolution of a particular pathology over many scans, quantify
subtle asymmetries of a specific anatomy, or integrate information from multiple acquisitions.
As a detailed example, consider tracking the growth of a specific lesion over time in a patient with
multiple abnormalities. After image pre-processing, the first challenge is segmenting only the spe-
cific lesion of interest. Available tools rarely generalize to diverse, real-world lesion types, and even
those that do offer no way to identify a specific lesion using natural language descriptors (e.g., by
anatomical location, size, or intensity). Additionally, current tools do not typically accommodate a
flexible number of acquisitions from a scan session. As a result, the user must choose a single suit-
able scan, develop a custom pipeline to programmatically select the target lesion, repeat the process
for later scans, and then compute the desired downstream metrics to track changes.
The example above illustrates a fundamental barrier in integrating AI in real imaging workflows.
While existing tools perform well on specific segmentation or classification targets (Billot et al.,
2023; Isensee et al., 2025), they are specialized to their intended use cases and cannot be used
directly to perform broader, integrated analyses that require executing multiple steps. This task-
level specialization limits the adoption of AI in radiology, leading to practitioners with complex
radiological questions needing to manually chain together multiple fragile, task-specific models and
develop extensive post-processing and metric-extraction workflows for each new study.
VoxelPrompt is fundamentally different in functionality and design from existing medical image
analysis systems. In VoxelPrompt, we jointly train a language model agent and vision network from
scratch to generate and execute end-to-end image analysis workflows. Given a task described in
natural language, the agent iteratively orchestrates a sequence of instructions as executable code.
The dynamically evaluated instructions generate spatial features (e.g., segmentations) using the vi-
sion network, incorporate natural language responses, and access a library of functions to compute
and provide quantitative outputs. Through diverse output modalities, VoxelPrompt can segment and
arXiv:2410.08397v2  [eess.IV]  15 Oct 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
Hoopes et al.
what are the tumor
dimensions?
22.7 x 25.6 x 28.5 mm
71.4 mm
measure the transverse
width of the CVI cyst
1
2
compute the increase in white matter
hypointensity volume since the ﬁrst visit
4.4x increase (+9.7 ml)
1
2
calculate progressive signal reduction
of the basal ganglia hyperdensity
0.31x less dense (-24.1 HU)
where is the lesion
located?
cerebellopontine angle
indicate the vascular
territory of the infarct
middle cerebral artery
1
2
does the lesion enhance after
contrast is administered?
the lesion exhibits contrast enhancement
1
2
determine diﬀusion characteristics
of the lesion
the lesion restricts diﬀusion
normalize right thalamic
volume by cranial size
5.18 x 10-3
how much larger is the
left lateral ventricle?
2.1x larger (+32.7 ml)
remove all non-brain
signal from the scan
crop 4 mm around the
brainstem & cerebellum
ROI Measurement
Multi-ROI Analysis
Language Characterization
Analysis Across Visits
Multiple Acquisition Analysis
Image Manipulation
1.26 x 10-2 mm2 / s
compute the mean
ADC value of the lesion
Figure 1: Illustrative examples of VoxelPrompt capabilities, each showing the input prompt (gray)
and volumes with VoxelPrompt’s predicted annotations and language responses (purple).
localize user-specified anatomical and pathological regions of interest, calculate measurements that
relate multiple scans to one another, and perform biomedical characterization (Figure 1).
We make several technical contributions to realize VoxelPrompt’s capabilities for real-world medical
imaging aims. Our convolutional vision network enables fine-grained, language-controlled visual
analysis by integrating jointly-trained language model embeddings as conditioning. To also support
multi-acquisition and longitudinal studies (Reuter et al., 2012), the vision network uses attention to
process volumetric features across sequences of any length. Further, unlike typical models tied to
fixed channels and voxel spacing (Zhang et al., 2024), VoxelPrompt operates on variable-sized inputs
at native resolution. This native processing yields substantial memory and runtime efficiency, en-
abling the joint training of vision and language components on large neuroimaging volumes on stan-
dard GPUs without prior resampling. Lastly, we facilitate robustness to acquisition type as well as
anatomical and pathological variation by creating and training on a large neurological dataset com-
bining public cohorts, new annotations of unlabeled pathological volumes, and simulated lesions.
We focus on brain imaging and show that VoxelPrompt enables end-to-end analysis on nuanced
and diverse tasks covering a wide range of MRI and CT acquisitions, anatomies, and diseases.
Quantitatively, we show that a single VoxelPrompt model captures, and often exceeds, the in-
dividual accuracy and capabilities of many single-task specialist neuroimaging baselines, while
retaining unique language prompted flexibility. These results highlight VoxelPrompt’s promise as a
foundation for tackling diverse and complex radiology workflows.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
VoxelPrompt
2
RELATED WORK
Brain Region Analysis. Widely-used neuroimage analysis pipelines typically delineate regions and
quantify their size, shape, composition, and change over time (Fischl, 2012; Jenkinson et al., 2012).
Modern approaches train networks to segment anatomical and pathological structures, including
cerebral subregions (Billot et al., 2023; Henschel et al., 2020), vessels (Hilbert et al., 2020; Livne
et al., 2019), and lesions (Hssayeni et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). While performant, these net-
works generally work for fixed segmentation targets and require significant human involvement for
analyzing data and deriving downstream ROI measures. VoxelPrompt aims to match or outperform
these methods in segmentation accuracy, while tackling a wider range of targets, enabling flexible
specification of target regions, and facilitating end-to-end workflows.
Learning Across Medical Imaging Tasks. Recent medical imaging methods aim to improve per-
formance by exploiting shared representations across diverse segmentation, classification, registra-
tion, and statistical modeling objectives in a single framework (Elmahdy et al., 2021; Graham et al.,
2023; Tellez et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2025; Czolbe & Dalca, 2023). Broad, segmentation-focused
tools, like interactive or in-context segmentation models, can adapt to specific biomedical targets,
prompted by partial image annotations (Cheng et al., 2023; Luo et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2024; Wong
et al., 2023) or example image-segmentation pairs (Min et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Butoi et al.,
2023; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rakic et al., 2024; Roy et al., 2020). However, these multi-task models
do not aim to address a complete analytical pipeline and can require finetuning in real scenarios. In
contrast, VoxelPrompt integrates supervision from many tasks to create computational workflows,
where multiple components interact to carry out requested analyses.
Medical Vision-Language Models.
Vision-language models (VLMs) trained on large-scale
biomedical image-caption datasets (Johnson et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a) can
facilitate biomedical visual question-answering (Chen et al., 2023a;b; Zhang et al., 2023a;b) and
clinical report generation (Bannur et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023c;b). However, current biomedi-
cal VLMs remain largely limited to narrow-domain, text generation tasks, and do not capture the
quantitative metrics required in real-world clinical imaging workflows. In contrast to current vision-
language models that produce text outputs in a black-box manner, VoxelPrompt explicitly produces
code for all relevant intermediate outputs and a traceable sequence of operations. This provides
analytical transparency for high-stakes applications. Also, unlike existing models, the VoxelPrompt
operations involve explicit vision operations to compute and present images depicting the essential
intermediate features. Finally, aside from few recent works (Chen et al., 2023a;b; Liu et al., 2023;
Wu et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2024), most models are trained exclusively on two-dimensional image
slices, often X-rays, making them inappropriate for MR and CT imaging. VoxelPrompt is instead
trained directly at native acquisition resolution, enabling it to process 3D volumes.
Language Models as Agents. Recent efforts extend large language models beyond plain text pre-
diction into agents capable of planning and executing actions for computational tasks. Often, these
generate code (Gupta & Kembhavi, 2023; Ke et al., 2025) that call external APIs for mathematical
computation (Ruan et al., 2023; Gou et al., 2023), image analysis (Subramanian et al., 2023; Sur´ıs
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023), scientific discovery (Bran et al., 2023; Boiko et al., 2023), and more.
Adaptive, feedback-driven agents address complex and dynamic problems by iteratively planning,
executing, and interpreting intermediate outcomes rather than predicting entire action sequences at
once (Huang et al., 2022; Rana et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023d;a; Yao et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023).
Building on this idea, VoxelPrompt trains an adaptive agent that interacts with a library of processing
functions. Unlike other methods, VoxelPrompt jointly trains an adaptable vision network to guide
image processing. Recent work in medical imaging (Li et al., 2024) trains an agent to select from
a set of pretrained, task-specific tools, but it does not execute downstream operations or leverage
flexible language prompting to distinguish ROIs with specific characteristics as in VoxelPrompt.
3
METHODS
3.1
MODELING DETAILS
VoxelPrompt processes volumes V in response to a text prompt p. A language model agent α trans-
lates the prompt into Python code executed in a persistent environment Ω, invoking actions involving
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Hoopes et al.
>> ratio = s2.volume() / s1.volume()
>> show("{ratio} increase (+{diff} ml)")
“compute the change in tumor
size since the last visit”
Visit 1
Visit 2
>> enc = encode(v1   , v2   )
>> read(enc)
>> s1, s2 = enc.segment(v1   , v2   )
>> delta = s2.volume() - s1.volume()
>> read(delta)
4.3
Environment Ω
“1.8x increase (+4.3 ml)”
(image 1 embedding)
(image 2 embedding)
Input Prompt and 3D Image Volumes
Output Response
enc
gen
Image Segmentation
Image Feature Encoding
Overview
Example Forward Pass
Step
1
Step
2
Step
3
Inputs
natural language
metrics
text prompt
3D image volumes
segs
Outputs
Language Agent
Vision Model
Python Env Ω
Figure 2: Top: VoxelPrompt takes a text prompt and volumes as input to a trainable agent α. The
agent iteratively produces executable code in a Python environment Ω, which controls a jointly-
trained vision model m. Bottom: To solve an example language-prompted task, the agent α in-
terprets execution outcomes z (blue) to guide subsequent instruction prediction across multiple
steps. To perform vision operations, such as volume encoding or generation, α employs vision
networks menc and mgen, which are manipulated by image-specific latent instruction embeddings ϕ.
mathematical computation, morphological operations, and interface interaction. A core function set
runs a jointly trained vision network directed by the agent to perform vision operations. Figure 2
summarizes this framework and outlines an example use-case. We provide low-level implementation
details in Appendix A.
Agent. The agent α produces code iteratively, with each step building on outcomes of prior actions.
At step i, it generates executable code ci = α(µi) based on a state representation µi ∈Rℓ,d with
sequence length ℓand embedding dimension d. The code runs in environment Ω, which preserves
variables across steps. Intermediate results from Ωcan be read and embedded into a representation zi
and incorporated into the next state µi+1 = µi q zi, where q denotes sequence concatenation. The
initial state µ1 encodes the prompt p and acquisition date metadata for each volume v ∈V. This loop
of code generation, execution, and feedback continues until a stopping code signals completion.
Vision Network. Several functions in environment Ωinvoke a shared convolutional vision network,
consisting of an input feature encoder E = menc(V, ϕ) and a volume generator W = mgen(E, ϕ).
The latent embeddings ϕ are produced by the agent, passed as arguments to the functions, and
condition the vision network for a specific goal. For example, they might direct the vision network
to segment the edema around the lesion in the frontal lobe. Vision network outputs E, W can then
be further processed by downstream actions to execute the user prompt.
Volume Interaction. The vision subnetworks share information across an arbitrary number of input
volumes using an attention mechanism. Each input volume v is processed by menc (or its encod-
ing Ev processed by mgen), producing individual streams of intermediate activations from each vol-
ume that interact with each other at each layer. Specifically, for voxel features as ∈Rc in volume
stream s, we concatenate as with stream-specific ϕs, and use a fully-connected layer to yield a′
s ∈
Rc. We then stack corresponding voxel representations a′
s across S streams to construct A′ ∈RS,c.
We interact streams in A′ using attention with dimension b: B = f(softmax(QKT b−1/2)V ) + A,
where Q, K, V
∈RS,b are learnable linear transformations of A, and fully-connected layer f
projects the output to RS,c. We then separate B into stream-specific voxel features for each volume.
Native Space Processing. Volumetric image formats define a world-coordinate transform specify-
ing in-plane voxel spacing x and inter-slice spacing y, with anisotropy ratio r = y/x. Standard tools
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
VoxelPrompt
often resample images to isotropic resolution, which greatly inflates data size for thick-slice acqui-
sitions. Instead, we implement a vision network that operates in native voxel resolutions by tracking
and updating spacings throughout the multi-scale hierarchy. In the downsampling arm, following
resolution level n, the target in-plane spacing is set to xn+1 = 2xn, while the target slice spacing
is updated to yn+1 = xn+1 only when rn ≤2. In the upsampling arm, voxel spacings are inferred
from the skip connections. During stream interaction, volume features are resampled to a common
geometry, then returned to their previous space.
Supervised Training. We jointly train the language model α and vision network from scratch on
a curated, diverse task set T (Section 3.2). Each task τ ∈T is paired with target (ground-truth)
code c∗that carries out the task objective, as illustrated in Figure 2. At each training step, we
sample τ ∼T , generate a prompt p, and sample input volumes V with ground-truth outputs W∗.
The training loss is Lce
 P(c), c∗
+ λ P|W|
j=1 Limg
 Wj, W∗
j

, where P(c) is the language model
output, volumes W are generated by the vision networks while executing c∗, Lce is cross-entropy,
and Limg compares predicted and target volumes (using soft Dice loss for segmentation).
3.2
TRAINING TASKS AND DATA DESIGN
We construct and curate a dataset T of brain imaging tasks, designing new task formulations and
labels across a wide range of image acquisitions, segmentation protocols, and annotation types.
We use this dataset to both train and evaluate VoxelPrompt in the joint prediction of analytical
instructions, spatial delineations, and natural language descriptions. We include a set of clinically-
oriented objectives, which are broadly categorized as either ROI processing or pathology description
tasks. For each task, we create ground-truth code c∗, used in training and evaluation. Additional
training data details are described in Appendix B.
Training Code for Quantitative ROI Processing. Quantitative processing tasks involve image
feature segmentation, optionally followed by downstream steps to compute ROI measures. We in-
clude a core segmentation task for all structures and pathology classes in our dataset. Downstream
processing tasks use predicted segmentations, sometimes in conjunction with the input volumes.
For example, some tasks involve removing, extracting, or cropping the field of view (FOV) around
a segmented region. Others use segmentations to compute ROI-specific statistics of image signal
intensities (e.g., mean intensity). Morphological tasks analyze ROI shape and compute total vol-
ume, bounding box dimensions, or the maximum height, width, and depth of a segmented structure.
We also include tasks that compute and compare such metrics across multiple segmentations. For
example, longitudinal tasks measure change in ROI properties across a series of scan sessions, and
multi-region tasks compare metrics from different ROIs in a single scan session. To support these
applications, ground-truth code c∗specifies a sequence of functions that predict the required seg-
mentations, compute relevant metrics, and format the results into an output message (Figure 2).
Training Code for Question Answering. We also train on question-answering tasks, where Voxel-
Prompt produces natural language responses from a combinatorially large set of possible answers.
For example, some tasks involve classifying lesion signal intensity as hyperintense, hypointense, or
isointense relative to surrounding tissue, while others require identifying anatomical location. Cer-
tain tasks integrate information across multiple images, for example, detecting restricted diffusion
from paired DWI and ADC maps, or assessing post-contrast lesion enhancement. We handcraft
a target language response for all possible answers. For each task, we construct the ground-truth
instruction code c∗with functions to (1) encode the input volumes, (2) read the encoded volume
features, and (3) output a text response with the correct natural language answer.
Training Prompt Synthesis. We synthesize a combinatorially diverse set of prompts for training.
For each task τ, we define a set of prompt templates Pτ containing placeholders to accommodate
multiple words, terminologies, and phrases with similar meanings. We compile a list of interchange-
able text Ck for each placeholder k. To generate a prompt p for task τ, we sample a template from
Pτ, then fill each placeholder k with text sampled from Ck. Placeholders may themselves con-
tain other placeholders, making the process recursive. This yields a diverse distribution of prompts
spanning clinical and imaging terminology, as well as variations in tense, syntax, and word choice.
Training Images and Segmentations. We assemble and annotate a collection of 6,925 3D brain
MRI and CT scans from 15 public datasets, comprising 185 bilateral anatomical structures and 14
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Hoopes et al.
pathology classes, focusing on a breadth of imaging types, regions of interest, and tasks. The MRI
sequences span T1w, T2w, FLAIR, PD, GRE, and DWI with various scan resolutions. The subjects
are split into 4,852 training, 213 validation, and 1,860 test volumes. Anatomical segmentations are
derived from established pipelines (Fischl, 2012; Greve et al., 2021; Hoopes et al., 2022), atlas anno-
tations (Adil et al., 2021; Pauli et al., 2018), manual corrections, and manual labeling of additional
structures in a small set of images, yielding high-quality whole-brain labels across multiple cohorts.
To capture diverse pathologies, we integrate expert-annotated lesions from BraTS, ISLES, ATLAS,
and WMH (Baid et al., 2021; Hernandez Petzsche et al., 2022; Liew et al., 2022; Kuijf et al., 2019),
covering gliomas, edema, infarcts, and white matter hyperintensities. We further compile rare cases
from Radiopaedia and manually delineate infarcts, arachnoid and epidermoid cysts, papillomas,
and many others. These new annotations also include sub-components like edema, enhancing tissue,
and heterogeneous intra-lesion features. Finally, we augment the dataset with a conditional synthesis
procedure that generates diverse lesions in healthy brains, broadening the distribution of pathological
presentations (Appendix B.5). To support analysis of lesion characteristics, we annotate each lesion
with its anatomical location, intensity profile, size, and position relative to surrounding structures,
and, when applicable, indicators of diffusion restriction or post-contrast enhancement.
4
EXPERIMENTS
VoxelPrompt addresses non-standard, open-ended workflows rather than a single fixed task. Its
evaluation, therefore, requires a diverse set of complementary experiments. We first present experi-
ments that evaluate VoxelPrompt’s ability to generate and execute accurate end-to-end brain analyses
across several representative practitioner use-cases. We then present analyses and ablations of mod-
eling decisions. We provide further experimental and test data details in Appendix C and include
additional results demonstrating disease characterization performance in Appendix D.
4.1
BRAIN IMAGE ANALYSIS
Ad hoc Neuroimaging Workflow Generation. Figure 1 shows that a single VoxelPrompt model
can execute a wide range of workflows on held out test data, including localizing brain anatomy
and pathology regions, extracting intensity metrics and morphology measures within user-specified
ROIs, and masking or cropping tissues for focused visualization. The model can compute and
compare metrics across ROIs, such as hippocampal asymmetry, normalized subcortical volumes, and
acute versus chronic hemorrhage components, as well as track longitudinal changes such as tumor
size across scans. By integrating multiple acquisitions, VoxelPrompt can further characterize lesion
locations and tissue properties, such as diffusion restriction or post-contrast enhancement. Figure 3A
shows that VoxelPrompt facilitates fine-grained specificity by supporting flexible, language-guided
analysis, such as isolation or differentiation of lesions in multifocal disease based on signal intensity,
size, relative position, or anatomical context (e.g., hemisphere, lobe, etc.). Examples in Figure 1
reflect common practitioner use-cases, but many are qualitative as no benchmark dataset currently
exists to evaluate free-form workflow generation outcomes for complex pathology analyses.
Text-prompted Zero-shot Lesion Segmentation. Zero-shot brain lesion segmentation enables
medical practitioners and researchers to rapidly localize and quantify pathologies without requir-
ing a disease-specific model. We evaluate VoxelPrompt’s zero-shot segmentation capabilities on
entirely unseen abnormality datasets using a dataset-specific prompt: “segment the ⟨ROI⟩,” where
⟨ROI⟩is the target lesion type or informative description. We benchmark our approach against
multi-dataset foundation models that include brain pathology segmentation as training tasks. These
include volumetric BiomedParse v2 (Zhao et al., 2024; 2025a) and SAT (Zhao et al., 2025b), both
of which use text prompts to target abnormalities. Most other existing text-prompted vision models,
or vision–language models (VLMs), are limited to question-answering tasks, and do not perform
quantitative analyses such as segmentation, thereby precluding them as baselines. We also use
MoME (Zhang et al., 2024), a recent generalizable brain abnormality segmentation model. Our
evaluation suite spans diverse targets: 30 meningiomas from BraTS-MEN (LaBella et al., 2024),
9 pediatric MRIs of multiple sclerosis lesions from PediMS (Popa et al., 2025), 35 resection cavi-
ties from EPISURG (P´erez-Garc´ıa et al., 2020), and 36 hemorrhages from BHSD (Wu et al., 2023).
VoxelPrompt has not been trained on these datasets, allowing for zero-shot performance assessment.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
VoxelPrompt
ground truth
VoxelPrompt
MoME
SAT
BiomedParse v2
VoxelPrompt
MoME
SAT
BiomedParse v2
VoxelPrompt
hippocampal
atrophy diﬀ.
eﬀect size
p value
p value
eﬀect size
lateral ventricle
expansion diﬀ.
runtime
-1.20
2.5e-7
1.12
2.6e-6
0.2 ± 0.0 sec
21.4 ± 1.4 hrs
1.14
1.8e-6
-1.21
1.9e-7
FreeSurfer
Dice (%)
Dice (%)
40
20
0
60
80
100
BraTS menin.
EPISURG
PediMS
BHSD
delineate the
hyperdense lesion
component
mark only
hetereogenous
hyperintensities
ﬁnd hypodense
necrotic tissue
within the mass
show peripheral
edema present
around the mass
compute a mask
of white matter
hyperintensities
delineate just the
parietal lobe
lesion
isolate peripheral
hyperintensities
on the left side
isolate only the
tumor in the
frontal lobe
segment the
hypointensity near
right ventricle 
B)  Zero-shot segmentation for heldout pathology datasets
C)  Zero-shot accuracy 
E)  Comparison of anatomical segmentation accuracy with SynthSeg
D) Longitudinal eﬀect detection
A) Description-based targeting of ROIs
EPISURG
BHSD
PediMS
BraTS meningioma
VoxelPrompt
SynthSeg
87.1
81.5
41.9
60.2
74.7
50.5
7.2
15.3
74.1
53.2
73.9
25.5
63.5
64.1
48.1
34.2
amygdala
hippo.
thalamus
caudate
putamen
accumbens
globus pallidus
dorsal striatum
inf. lat. vent.
lateral vent.
third vent.
fourth vent.
cerebellum
brainstem
cingulate
frontal
cortical structure groups
parietal
temporal
occipital
60
80
40
100
Figure 3: VoxelPrompt performance. (A) Free-form text prompts, shown below each image, guide
VoxelPrompt to perform targeted analysis and delineation of nuanced, context-specific image re-
gions, even in scans with multiple lesions. (B, C) On unseen datasets with diverse brain abnormal-
ities, VoxelPrompt is the only method achieving consistently high-quality results both qualitatively
and quantitatively. (D) Compared to longitudinal FreeSurfer, VoxelPrompt achieves the same effect
size in distinguishing Alzheimer’s disease from controls with a 105× faster runtime. (E) Voxel-
Prompt outperforms the state-of-the-art specialist model (SynthSeg) on whole brain segmentation.
Figures 3B and C demonstrate that VoxelPrompt is the only method that achieves consistently high
performance across all lesion target types, and on average achieves the highest Dice score. We find
that no baseline achieves generalization across abnormalities, and the second-best method varies
from dataset to dataset. Quantitatively, VoxelPrompt achieves a mean 12.53 Dice points higher than
MoME, the overall second-best method. Appendix Figure 6 shows per-subject performances.
Whole Brain Anatomical Segmentation. We evaluate VoxelPrompt’s ability to segment diverse
neuroanatomical targets. Since many brain structures are bilateral, we prompt VoxelPrompt to “seg-
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Hoopes et al.
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
90
80
70
80
seconds
peak GB
inference runtime
inference memory
number of input volumes
added corrupted images
training step memory
A) Comparison to single-task segmentation specialists
B) Native resolution eﬃciency gains
C) Multi-input robustness
-0.2
100
infarct
edema
glioma
cyst
papilloma
meningioma
WMH
putamen
caudate
thalamus
hippo.
0
nucleus
accumbens
lateral
ventricle
parahippo.
gyrus
pars
triang.
precentral
gyrus
cuneus
50
0
1
2
-0.2*
*
*
*
100
60
80
-0.1
-0.3
-0.7
-0.3
-0.5
+2.9
+0.2
+2.8
+17.6
+6.1
+1.2
*
*
+0.0
+0.0
+0.1
+0.5
Dice (%)
Dice (%)
VoxelPrompt
Specialist baseline
attention
max
native resolutions
isotropic
90% OOM
mean
Figure 4: Ablations and analyses. (A) A single VoxelPrompt model trained jointly on all tasks
matches or exceeds task-specific models for both lesions (left) and anatomy (right). Asterisks indi-
cate statistically significant differences. (B) Our proposed native-resolution convolutions are more
efficient in runtime and memory than isotropic resampling. (C) Our attention mechanism for multi-
input volume interaction is more robust to image corruptions compared to max and mean reductions.
ment the left and right ⟨ROI⟩” to generate joint segmentations, where applicable. We compare
against the widely used state-of-the-art SynthSeg v2 (Billot et al., 2023) method for multi-class
anatomical segmentation, which generalizes across the diverse acquisition contrasts exhibited in our
image dataset. We use a structural MRI test set of 108 unseen volumes, which span various tissue
contrasts and contain ground-truth segmentations for the 45 structures predicted by SynthSeg.
Figure 3E shows that VoxelPrompt significantly outperforms SynthSeg (p < 0.05) on 23/45 ROIs,
with a mean Dice improvement of +1.1 ± 2.3% over all structures. While VoxelPrompt achieves
a modest improvement, we emphasize that our main goal is not to outperform established tools
for segmentation sub-tasks, but rather to provide reliable anatomical segmentations while retaining
VoxelPrompt’s unique flexibility of natural language prompting for workflows.
Longitudinal Analyses. Figure 1 shows qualitatively that VoxelPrompt performs volumetric anal-
yses across time for various pathologies. Here, we quantify performance for longitudinal analyses
of anatomical structures, a core component of large neuroimaging studies.
We aggregate 100
subjects with two MRI sessions separated by two years from the ADNI dataset (Weber et al., 2021),
equally split between controls and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) subjects. We assess VoxelPrompt’s
off-the-shelf ability to measure the change in AD-affected structures over time, and use that to
distinguish controls from AD subjects. Specifically, we compare effect sizes and runtime against
longitudinal FreeSurfer (Reuter et al., 2012), the widely used standard for multi-session analysis.
As demonstrated in Figure 3D, VoxelPrompt can detect well-established AD-related effects, such as
increased hippocampal atrophy and increased ventricle volume expansion over time, with a similar
effect size to FreeSurfer, while offering a dramatic 3.8 × 105 speedup in runtime.
4.2
ABLATIONS AND ANALYSES
Multi-Task Training. We test whether the proposed single VoxelPrompt model trained jointly on
multiple tasks can match the performance of single-task specialist networks. We optimize individual,
label-specific segmentation networks with the same architecture as the VoxelPrompt vision network,
for a subset of distinct segmentation tasks, using a soft Dice loss. Since optimizing a specialized
baseline for each ROI in our training dataset is computationally prohibitive, we select a subset of
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
VoxelPrompt
10 anatomical and 7 pathology targets spanning diverse shapes and locations. In total, the resulting
evaluation subset encompasses 638 held-out subjects.
Figure 4A shows that VoxelPrompt performance is on par with (p > 0.05) or exceeds (p < 0.05) the
performance of 13/17 single-task specialists. The mean Dice difference relative to the specialists
is +4.3 ± 5.7% for pathology targets and −0.1 ± 0.3% for anatomical structures. This shows that
multi-task training in VoxelPrompt rivals specialist models, while offering substantial improvement
for brain abnormality segmentation, especially for variable lesions and limited data.
Native Resolution Efficiency. We evaluate the efficiency gains of the proposed native-resolution
vision network by comparing the processing of images at their native resolution to the standard
approach of conforming all inputs to a 1 mm3 isotropic geometry (Billot et al., 2023). For both
approaches, we measure inference runtime, peak GPU memory during inference, and training mem-
ory incurred during the backward pass of a single optimization step using the VoxelPrompt model.
Image geometries are drawn from a distribution reflecting those encountered in a single clinical scan
session (Appendix C.3), and results are averaged over 500 samples. To assess scalability, we repeat
the experiment with increasing numbers of input images per sample.
Figure 4B shows that, averaged across all numbers of input volumes, native-resolution processing
achieves a 2× reduction in inference runtime and a 2.4× memory reduction compared to isotropic
resolution conformation. Isotropic resampling in training incurs 2.2× higher memory costs, ren-
dering it challenging to train a multi-modal model that accepts only isotropic inputs on standard
hardware. For example, with 5 input volumes, frequently present in a longitudinal MRI series,
isotropic inputs cause out-of-memory errors on 90% of sampled batches on an 80 GB GPU.
Mechanisms of Stream Interaction. We compare our attention-based interaction module with
existing non-parametric alternatives (Butoi et al., 2023) that interact features across image inputs
using mean or max reductions. To isolate the effect of interaction, we train vision-only models
using three mechanisms: attention, mean, and max reduction (Appendix C.5). We train models
using synthetic multi-contrast brain images generated from 360 MRIs using a domain randomization
pipeline (Gopinath et al., 2024). Synthetic inputs enable us to explicitly test accuracy gains from
multi-contrast integration. We also measure robustness to groups of images of variable quality by
synthetically corrupting a subset of images in a group. We evaluate using 500 synthetic brains
with arbitrary contrasts, measuring average Dice over 35 anatomical labels. We find that all three
mechanisms achieve similar overall accuracy improvements as the number of uncorrupted inputs is
increased (see Appendix Table 2). However, as shown in Figure 4C, attention interaction is markedly
more robust to image quality: when including corrupted inputs, Dice degrades by only 0.6 ± 3.4%,
compared to 4.6 ± 4.5% and 5.4 ± 4.0% for max- and mean-reduction, respectively.
5
DISCUSSION
Limitations and Future Work. The VoxelPrompt vision and language networks are trained from
scratch on simulated user prompts generated from templates, which limits their utility when given
entirely unseen prompts. This limitation can be addressed by constructing more diverse datasets
containing a broader range of tasks, either through simulations or language instructions from real
users. While VoxelPrompt was trained on a combination of public brain imaging datasets and
images we aggregated and annotated from the open Internet, its training set can be extended further
by inferring tasks from clinical images and their associated reports, which might better cover the
complex edge-case pathologies seen in practice. Additionally, instead of training the language
model from scratch, a lightweight pre-trained language model with broad programming and natural
language knowledge could be finetuned to support generalization to new tasks. We believe that our
training strategy is generic and could be productively applied to radiology beyond neuroimaging.
Conclusions. We introduced VoxelPrompt, a vision-language system that can address radiological
aims not possible with existing methods as well as tasks that today require a multitude of specialized
models and extensive manual user work. We demonstrated that agent-based VoxelPrompt accurately
solves a broad spectrum of neuroimaging tasks involving end-to-end image analysis. Moreover, it
provides transparent execution steps that can provide users with confidence in its results. We antic-
ipate VoxelPrompt’s use in projects, ad hoc studies, and clinical pipelines, empowering biomedical
users to adopt AI into their medical imaging workflows.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Hoopes et al.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported in part by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineer-
ing (R01 EB033773, T32 EB001680), the Harvard MIT Neuroimaging Training Program, the Na-
tional Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowships Program, Quanta Computer Incorporated,
and Felicis Ventures.
REFERENCES
Syed M Adil, Evan Calabrese, Lefko T Charalambous, James J Cook, Shervin Rahimpour, Ahmet F
Atik, Gary P Cofer, Beth A Parente, G Allan Johnson, Shivanand P Lad, et al. A high-resolution
interactive atlas of the human brainstem using magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage, 237:
118135, 2021.
Anahit Babayan, Miray Erbey, Deniz Kumral, Janis D Reinelt, Andrea MF Reiter, Josefin R¨obbig,
H Lina Schaare, Marie Uhlig, Alfred Anwander, Pierre-Louis Bazin, et al. A mind-brain-body
dataset of mri, eeg, cognition, emotion, and peripheral physiology in young and old adults. Sci-
entific data, 6(1):1–21, 2019.
Ujjwal Baid, Satyam Ghodasara, Suyash Mohan, Michel Bilello, Evan Calabrese, Errol Colak, Key-
van Farahani, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Felipe C Kitamura, Sarthak Pati, et al. The rsna-asnr-
miccai brats 2021 benchmark on brain tumor segmentation and radiogenomic classification. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.02314, 2021.
Shruthi Bannur, Kenza Bouzid, Daniel C Castro, Anton Schwaighofer, Sam Bond-Taylor, Maxi-
milian Ilse, Fernando P´erez-Garc´ıa, Valentina Salvatelli, Harshita Sharma, Felix Meissen, et al.
Maira-2: Grounded radiology report generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04449, 2024.
Benjamin Billot, Douglas N Greve, Oula Puonti, Axel Thielscher, Koen Van Leemput, Bruce Fischl,
Adrian V Dalca, Juan Eugenio Iglesias, et al. Synthseg: Segmentation of brain mri scans of any
contrast and resolution without retraining. Medical image analysis, 86:102789, 2023.
Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific research
capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023.
Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe
Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05376, 2023.
Victor Ion Butoi, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Tianyu Ma, Mert R Sabuncu, John Guttag,
and Adrian V Dalca.
Universeg: Universal medical image segmentation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.06131, 2023.
Qiuhui Chen, Xinyue Hu, Zirui Wang, and Yi Hong. Medblip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training from 3d medical images and texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10799, 2023a.
Yinda Chen, Che Liu, Wei Huang, Sibo Cheng, Rossella Arcucci, and Zhiwei Xiong. Genera-
tive text-guided 3d vision-language pretraining for unified medical image segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.04811, 2023b.
Junlong Cheng, Jin Ye, Zhongying Deng, Jianpin Chen, Tianbin Li, Haoyu Wang, Yanzhou Su,
Ziyan Huang, Jilong Chen, Lei Jiang, et al. Sam-med2d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16184, 2023.
Steffen Czolbe and Adrian V Dalca. Neuralizer: General neuroimage analysis without re-training.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
6217–6230, 2023.
Neel Dey, Benjamin Billot, Hallee E Wong, Clinton J Wang, Mengwei Ren, P Ellen Grant, Adrian V
Dalca, and Polina Golland. Learning general-purpose biomedical volume representations using
randomized synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02372, 2024.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
VoxelPrompt
Mohamed S Elmahdy, Laurens Beljaards, Sahar Yousefi, Hessam Sokooti, Fons Verbeek, Uulke A
Van Der Heide, and Marius Staring. Joint registration and segmentation via multi-task learning
for adaptive radiotherapy of prostate cancer. IEEE Access, 9:95551–95568, 2021.
Bruce Fischl. Freesurfer. Neuroimage, 62(2):774–781, 2012.
Karthik Gopinath, Andrew Hoopes, Daniel C Alexander, Steven E Arnold, Yael Balbastre, Benjamin
Billot, Adri`a Casamitjana, You Cheng, Russ Yue Zhi Chua, Brian L Edlow, et al. Synthetic data
in generalizable, learning-based neuroimaging. Imaging Neuroscience, 2:1–22, 2024.
Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yujiu Yang, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, Weizhu Chen,
et al. Tora: A tool-integrated reasoning agent for mathematical problem solving. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.17452, 2023.
Simon Graham, Quoc Dang Vu, Mostafa Jahanifar, Shan E Ahmed Raza, Fayyaz Minhas, David
Snead, and Nasir Rajpoot. One model is all you need: multi-task learning enables simultaneous
histology image segmentation and classification. Medical Image Analysis, 83:102685, 2023.
Douglas N Greve, Benjamin Billot, Devani Cordero, Andrew Hoopes, Malte Hoffmann, Adrian V
Dalca, Bruce Fischl, Juan Eugenio Iglesias, and Jean C Augustinack. A deep learning toolbox
for automatic segmentation of subcortical limbic structures from mri images. Neuroimage, 244:
118610, 2021.
Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning
without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 14953–14962, 2023.
Michael Hanke, Florian J Baumgartner, Pierre Ibe, Falko R Kaule, Stefan Pollmann, Oliver Speck,
Wolf Zinke, and J¨org Stadler. A high-resolution 7-tesla fmri dataset from complex natural stimu-
lation with an audio movie. Scientific data, 1(1):1–18, 2014.
Leonie Henschel, Sailesh Conjeti, Santiago Estrada, Kersten Diers, Bruce Fischl, and Martin Reuter.
Fastsurfer - a fast and accurate deep learning based neuroimaging pipeline. NeuroImage, 219:
117012, 2020.
Moritz R Hernandez Petzsche, Ezequiel de la Rosa, Uta Hanning, Roland Wiest, Waldo Valenzuela,
Mauricio Reyes, Maria Meyer, Sook-Lei Liew, Florian Kofler, Ivan Ezhov, et al. Isles 2022: A
multi-center magnetic resonance imaging stroke lesion segmentation dataset. Scientific data, 9
(1):762, 2022.
Adam Hilbert, Vince I Madai, Ela M Akay, Orhun U Aydin, Jonas Behland, Jan Sobesky, Ivana
Galinovic, Ahmed A Khalil, Abdel A Taha, Jens Wuerfel, et al. Brave-net: fully automated
arterial brain vessel segmentation in patients with cerebrovascular disease. Frontiers in artificial
intelligence, 3:552258, 2020.
Malte Hoffmann, Andrew Hoopes, Douglas N. Greve, Bruce Fischl, and Adrian V. Dalca. Anatomy-
aware and acquisition-agnostic joint registration with SynthMorph. Imaging Neuroscience, 2:
1–33, 06 2024. ISSN 2837-6056. doi: 10.1162/imag a 00197.
Andrew Hoopes, Jocelyn S Mora, Adrian V Dalca, Bruce Fischl, and Malte Hoffmann. Synthstrip:
Skull-stripping for any brain image. NeuroImage, 260:119474, 2022.
Murtadha D Hssayeni, Muayad S Croock, Aymen D Salman, Hassan Falah Al-Khafaji, Zakaria A
Yahya, and Behnaz Ghoraani. Intracranial hemorrhage segmentation using a deep convolutional
model. Data, 5(1):14, 2020.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Fabian Isensee, Maximilian Rokuss, Lars Kr¨amer, Stefan Dinkelacker, Ashis Ravindran, Florian
Stritzke, Benjamin Hamm, Tassilo Wald, Moritz Langenberg, Constantin Ulrich, et al. nninterac-
tive: Redefining 3d promptable segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08373, 2025.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Hoopes et al.
Mark Jenkinson, Christian F Beckmann, Timothy EJ Behrens, Mark W Woolrich, and Stephen M
Smith. Fsl. Neuroimage, 62(2):782–790, 2012.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Seth J Berkowitz, Nathaniel R Greenbaum, Matthew P Lun-
gren, Chih-ying Deng, Roger G Mark, and Steven Horng. Mimic-cxr, a de-identified publicly
available database of chest radiographs with free-text reports. Scientific data, 6(1):317, 2019.
Fucai Ke, Joy Hsu, Zhixi Cai, Zixian Ma, Xin Zheng, Xindi Wu, Sukai Huang, Weiqing Wang,
Pari Delir Haghighi, Gholamreza Haffari, et al. Explain before you answer: A survey on compo-
sitional visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17298, 2025.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Hugo J Kuijf, J Matthijs Biesbroek, Jeroen De Bresser, Rutger Heinen, Simon Andermatt, Mariana
Bento, Matt Berseth, Mikhail Belyaev, M Jorge Cardoso, Adria Casamitjana, et al. Standardized
assessment of automatic segmentation of white matter hyperintensities and results of the wmh
segmentation challenge. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 38(11):2556–2568, 2019.
Dominic LaBella, Omaditya Khanna, Shan McBurney-Lin, Ryan Mclean, Pierre Nedelec, Arif S
Rashid, Nourel Hoda Tahon, Talissa Altes, Ujjwal Baid, Radhika Bhalerao, et al.
A multi-
institutional meningioma mri dataset for automated multi-sequence image segmentation. Sci-
entific data, 11(1):496, 2024.
Pamela J LaMontagne, Tammie LS Benzinger, John C Morris, Sarah Keefe, Russ Hornbeck,
Chengjie Xiong, Elizabeth Grant, Jason Hassenstab, Krista Moulder, Andrei G Vlassenko,
et al. Oasis-3: longitudinal neuroimaging, clinical, and cognitive dataset for normal aging and
alzheimer disease. MedRxiv, pp. 2019–12, 2019.
Binxu Li, Tiankai Yan, Yuanting Pan, Zhe Xu, Jie Luo, Ruiyang Ji, Shilong Liu, Haoyu Dong, Zihao
Lin, and Yixin Wang. Mmedagent: Learning to use medical tools with multi-modal agent. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.02483, 2024.
Sook-Lei Liew, Bethany P Lo, Miranda R Donnelly, Artemis Zavaliangos-Petropulu, Jessica N
Jeong, Giuseppe Barisano, Alexandre Hutton, Julia P Simon, Julia M Juliano, Anisha Suri, et al.
A large, curated, open-source stroke neuroimaging dataset to improve lesion segmentation algo-
rithms. Scientific data, 9(1):320, 2022.
Weixiong Lin, Ziheng Zhao, Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi
Xie. Pmc-clip: Contrastive language-image pre-training using biomedical documents. In In-
ternational Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp.
525–536. Springer, 2023.
Che Liu, Cheng Ouyang, Yinda Chen, Cesar C´esar Quilodr´an-Casas, Lei Ma, Jie Fu, Yike Guo,
Anand Shah, Wenjia Bai, and Rossella Arcucci. T3d: Towards 3d medical image understanding
through vision-language pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.01529, 2023.
Chin-Fu Liu, Johnny T. C. Hsu, Xin Xu, Sandhya Ramachandran, Victor Wang, Michael I. Miller,
Argye Elizabeth Hillis, Andreia Vasconcellos Faria, Max Steven J. Gregory W. Stephen M.
James C. Werner Do Wintermark Warach Albers Davis Grotta Hacke Kang K, Max Winter-
mark, Steven J. Warach, Gregory W. Albers, Stephen M. Davis, James Charles Grotta, Werner
Hacke, Dong-Wha Kang, Chelsea Kidwell, Walter J. Koroshetz, Kennedy R. Lees, Michael H.
Lev, David S. Liebeskind, A. Gregory Sorensen, Vincent N. Thijs, G¨otz Thomalla, Joanna Mar-
guerite Wardlaw, and Marie Luby. Deep learning-based detection and segmentation of diffusion
abnormalities in acute ischemic stroke. Communications Medicine, 1, 2021.
Peirong Liu, Oula Puonti, Xiaoling Hu, Karthik Gopinath, Annabel Sorby-Adams, Daniel C Alexan-
der, W Taylor Kimberly, and Juan E Iglesias. A modality-agnostic multi-task foundation model
for human brain imaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00549, 2025.
Michelle Livne, Jana Rieger, Orhun Utku Aydin, Abdel Aziz Taha, Ela Marie Akay, Tabea Kossen,
Jan Sobesky, John D Kelleher, Kristian Hildebrand, Dietmar Frey, et al. A u-net deep learning
framework for high performance vessel segmentation in patients with cerebrovascular disease.
Frontiers in neuroscience, 13:97, 2019.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
VoxelPrompt
Xiangde Luo, Guotai Wang, Tao Song, Jingyang Zhang, Michael Aertsen, Jan Deprest, Sebastien
Ourselin, Tom Vercauteren, and Shaoting Zhang. Mideepseg: Minimally interactive segmentation
of unseen objects from medical images using deep learning. Medical image analysis, 72:102102,
2021.
Jun Ma, Yuting He, Feifei Li, Lin Han, Chenyu You, and Bo Wang. Segment anything in medical
images. Nature Communications, 15(1):654, 2024.
Daniel S Marcus, Tracy H Wang, Jamie Parker, John G Csernansky, John C Morris, and Randy L
Buckner. Open access series of imaging studies (oasis): cross-sectional mri data in young, middle
aged, nondemented, and demented older adults. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 19(9):1498–
1507, 2007.
In´es M´erida, Julien Jung, Sandrine Bouvard, Didier Le Bars, Sophie Lancelot, Franck Lavenne, Car-
oline Bouillot, J´erˆome Redout´e, Alexander Hammers, and Nicolas Costes. Cermep-idb-mrxfdg:
A database of 37 normal adult human brain [18f] fdg pet, t1 and flair mri, and ct images available
for research. EJNMMI research, 11(1):1–10, 2021.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Metaicl: Learning to learn
in context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15943, 2021.
Cheng Ouyang, Carlo Biffi, Chen Chen, Turkay Kart, Huaqi Qiu, and Daniel Rueckert.
Self-
supervised learning for few-shot medical image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, 41(7):1837–1848, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Wolfgang M Pauli, Amanda N Nili, and J Michael Tyszka. A high-resolution probabilistic in vivo
atlas of human subcortical brain nuclei. Scientific data, 5(1):1–13, 2018.
Fernando P´erez-Garc´ıa, Roman Rodionov, Ali Alim-Marvasti, Rachel Sparks, John S Duncan, and
S´ebastien Ourselin. Simulation of brain resection for cavity segmentation using self-supervised
and semi-supervised learning. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 115–125. Springer, 2020.
Ana Lu´ısa Pinho, Alexis Amadon, Torsten Ruest, Murielle Fabre, Elvis Dohmatob, Isabelle
Denghien, Chantal Ginisty, S´everine Becuwe-Desmidt, S´everine Roger, Laurence Laurier, et al.
Individual brain charting, a high-resolution fmri dataset for cognitive mapping. Scientific data, 5
(1):1–15, 2018.
Maria Popa, Gabriela Adriana Vis,a, and Ciprian Radu S, ofariu. Pedims: A pediatric multiple scle-
rosis lesion segmentation dataset. Scientific Data, 12(1):1184, 2025.
Marianne Rakic, Hallee E Wong, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Beth Cimini, John Guttag, and
Adrian V Dalca. Tyche: Stochastic in-context learning for medical image segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.13650, 2024.
Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian Reid, and Niko Suenderhauf.
Sayplan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable task planning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06135, 2023.
Martin Reuter, Nicholas J Schmansky, H Diana Rosas, and Bruce Fischl. Within-subject template
estimation for unbiased longitudinal image analysis. Neuroimage, 61(4):1402–1418, 2012.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
ical image segmentation.
In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–
MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-
ings, part III 18, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Abhijit Guha Roy, Shayan Siddiqui, Sebastian P¨olsterl, Nassir Navab, and Christian Wachinger.
‘squeeze & excite’guided few-shot segmentation of volumetric images. Medical image analysis,
59:101587, 2020.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Hoopes et al.
Jingqing Ruan, Yihong Chen, Bin Zhang, Zhiwei Xu, Tianpeng Bao, Hangyu Mao, Ziyue Li, Xingyu
Zeng, Rui Zhao, et al. Tptu: Task planning and tool usage of large language model-based ai
agents. In NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop, 2023.
Sanjay Subramanian, Medhini Narasimhan, Kushal Khangaonkar, Kevin Yang, Arsha Nagrani,
Cordelia Schmid, Andy Zeng, Trevor Darrell, and Dan Klein. Modular visual question answering
via code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05392, 2023.
D´ıdac Sur´ıs, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for
reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
11888–11898, 2023.
David Tellez, Diederik H¨oppener, Cornelis Verhoef, Dirk Gr¨unhagen, Pieter Nierop, Michal
Drozdzal, Jeroen Laak, and Francesco Ciompi. Extending unsupervised neural image compres-
sion with supervised multitask learning. In Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, pp. 770–783.
PMLR, 2020.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-
main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In
2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS), pp. 23–30.
IEEE, 2017.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Niko-
lay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023a.
Zhanyu Wang, Lingqiao Liu, Lei Wang, and Luping Zhou. Metransformer: Radiology report gen-
eration by transformer with multiple learnable expert tokens. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11558–11567, 2023b.
Zhanyu Wang, Lingqiao Liu, Lei Wang, and Luping Zhou. R2gengpt: Radiology report generation
with frozen llms. Meta-Radiology, 1(3):100033, 2023c.
Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe,
explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world
multi-task agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560, 2023d.
Christopher J Weber, Maria C Carrillo, William Jagust, Clifford R Jack Jr, Leslie M Shaw, John Q
Trojanowski, Andrew J Saykin, Laurel A Beckett, Cyrille Sur, Naren P Rao, et al. The worldwide
alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative: Adni-3 updates and global perspectives. Alzheimer’s
& Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions, 7(1):e12226, 2021.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, R´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Hallee E Wong, Marianne Rakic, John Guttag, and Adrian V Dalca. Scribbleprompt: Fast and
flexible interactive segmentation for any medical image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07381, 2023.
Biao Wu, Yutong Xie, Zeyu Zhang, Jinchao Ge, Kaspar Yaxley, Suzan Bahadir, Qi Wu, Yifan
Liu, and Minh-Son To.
Bhsd: A 3d multi-class brain hemorrhage segmentation dataset.
In
International workshop on machine learning in medical imaging, pp. 147–156. Springer, 2023.
Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Hui Hui, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Towards generalist
foundation model for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. Nature Communi-
cations, 16(1):7866, 2025.
Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
VoxelPrompt
Zhengyuan Yang, Linjie Li, Jianfeng Wang, Kevin Lin, Ehsan Azarnasab, Faisal Ahmed, Zicheng
Liu, Ce Liu, Michael Zeng, and Lijuan Wang. Mm-react: Prompting chatgpt for multimodal
reasoning and action. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11381, 2023.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629,
2022.
Sheng Zhang, Yanbo Xu, Naoto Usuyama, Hanwen Xu, Jaspreet Bagga, Robert Tinn, Sam Pre-
ston, Rajesh Rao, Mu Wei, Naveen Valluri, et al.
Biomedclip: a multimodal biomedical
foundation model pretrained from fifteen million scientific image-text pairs.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.00915, 2023a.
Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ziheng Zhao, Weixiong Lin, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi
Xie. Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.10415, 2023b.
Xinru Zhang, Ni Ou, Berke Doga Basaran, Marco Visentin, Mengyun Qiao, Renyang Gu, Cheng
Ouyang, Yaou Liu, Paul M Matthews, Chuyang Ye, et al. A foundation model for brain lesion
segmentation with mixture of modality experts. In International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 379–389. Springer, 2024.
Theodore Zhao, Yu Gu, Jianwei Yang, Naoto Usuyama, Ho Hin Lee, Tristan Naumann, Jianfeng
Gao, Angela Crabtree, Brian Piening, Carlo Bifulco, et al. Biomedparse: a biomedical foundation
model for image parsing of everything everywhere all at once. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12971,
2024.
Theodore Zhao, Ho Hin Lee, Alberto Santamaria-Pang, Noel C Codella, Sid Kiblawi, Yu Gu,
Yu Fang, Wenxuan Teng, Naiteek Sangani, Ivan Tarapov, Matthew P. Lungren, Matthias Blon-
deel, Tristan Naumann, Naoto Usuyama, Sheng Wang, Paul Vozila, Hoifung Poon, and Mu Wei.
Biomedparse-v : Scaling foundation model for universal text-guided volumetric biomedical im-
age segmentation. In Foundation Models for 3D Biomedical Image Segmentation Workshop at
CVPR, 2025a.
Ziheng Zhao, Yao Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Xiao Zhou, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and
Weidi Xie. Large-vocabulary segmentation for medical images with text prompts. npj Digital
Medicine, 8(1):566, 2025b.
Hong-Yu Zhou, Subathra Adithan, Juli´an Nicol´as Acosta, Eric J Topol, and Pranav Ra-
jpurkar.
A generalist learner for multifaceted medical image interpretation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.07988, 2024.
Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li,
Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-
world environments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
Hoopes et al.
A
MODEL IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We implement VoxelPrompt with PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and use Python as the programming
language of the code c and persistent programming environment Ω. To support the wide range of
imaging operations required by T , we develop and use a PyTorch library of volumetric medical
image utilities, called Voxel, available at github.com/dalcalab/voxel.
A.1
LANGUAGE AGENT
We implement the agent model α as a decoder-only transformer stack, using a randomly initialized
LLaMA architecture (Touvron et al., 2023; Wolf et al., 2019) with 16 transformer blocks, a hidden
representation of size d = 512, a linear representation of size 2048, and 32 attention heads. We
convert text into an embedding space by splitting character groups into tokens (from a vocabulary
of size γ) and mapping them to a sequence of Rd features via an embedding matrix in Rγ,d. We use
the pre-computed tokenizer released with LLaMA 2, with γ = 32,000.
The language model auto-regressively generates instruction embeddings φ = φc q φϕ based on
the input µ. We pass φc through a fully-connected layer to obtain text token probabilities P(c),
and decode into code c by choosing the maximum probability token at each sequence position. We
pass φϕ through a fully-connected layer to compute the vision network modulators ϕ.
To split φϕ and φc, we first transform φ embeddings into a sequence of max-probability tokens.
We extract φϕ from all sequence positions that immediately follow special token <MOD>, and we
extract φc from all remaining positions. The agent α predicts <MOD> and subsequent φϕ features
after each volume encoding and generation function argument. We project φϕ embeddings to ϕ
using a fully-connected layer with 32 output channels and SiLU activation.
A.2
PERSISTENT ENVIRONMENT
In environment Ω, we predefine a variable corresponding to each volume v. As the code ci is
executed, new variables are defined and retained in Ω, persisting across steps. To guide the next
instruction step, ci can include read operations, which extract the value of a variable in Ωand
embed it in a representation zi as feedback in the next state µi+1 = µi q φi q zi.
For each volume v passed through menc, we reduce the spatial dimensions of the deepest layer
output using a global max operator. We pass these pooled features through a fully-connected layer
to compute ε◦
v ∈Rd. When a read instruction is executed on a set of volume encodings E defined
in Ω, we concatenate each ε◦
v ∈E into the feedback embeddings z.
A.3
VOLUME ENCODER AND GENERATOR SUBNETWORKS
We implement menc and mgen as the respective down-sampling and up-sampling arms of a six-
level UNet-like model (Ronneberger et al., 2015). Each level consists of a 3D convolutional layer
followed by a latent feature ϕ mixing layer and stream interaction layer with b = 32, as defined
in Section 3.1. All layers use SiLU activations. The spatial outputs at each level are channel-
normalized with a group size of four, then max-pooled (menc) or trilinearly upsampled (mgen) by a
factor of two. Convolution kernels have size 33, with 32 output channels at the top resolution level
and 96 output channels at all other levels.
For all input volume streams, we populate E with spatial features output at each level in menc. We
use these latent features as skip-connections to corresponding level inputs in the generator mgen,
which predicts volumes through a convolutional layer with one output channel. Lastly, we apply the
sigmoid activation to generate binary segmentation maps. If multiple volumes from a single scan
session are passed as input to VoxelPrompt, we compute a merged, session-specific segmentation by
extracting the max values across outputs corresponding to each session.
A.4
OPTIMIZATION
We train VoxelPrompt using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with an initial learning rate
of 10−4, a batch size of one, and 10 gradient accumulation steps on an NVIDIA A100 GPU. We
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
VoxelPrompt
halve the learning rate after 105 steps with no improvement in validation accuracy, stopping training
after four sets of learning rate updates. We set the volume loss weight λ = 0.1.
B
TRAINING DATA DETAILS
B.1
IMAGE PREPROCESSING AND AUGMENTATION
For each image volume, we normalize intensities within the range [0, 1], conform the data layout to
a right-anterior-superior (RAS) orientation, and crop the field of view to a 20 mm margin around the
cranial cavity. We co-register all images acquired from each subject using Hoffmann et al. (2024).
In training, we randomly sample up to 8 (or max available) images corresponding to a scan session.
We augment images by applying random affine transformations, spatial intensity distortions (bias
field simulations, spatial smoothing, k-space corruptions), exponential scaling, lateral anatomical
flipping, cropping, anatomical masking, and voxel resizing. We take advantage of our resolution-
agnostic vision network and randomly sparsify training data to reduce voxel throughput and signifi-
cantly reduce total train time. This random sparsification is performed by sampling slice separations
from the range [1, 6] mm or by cropping the field of view. We ensure that the target ROI, if applica-
ble, is not removed during this process. Volume sparsification is performed with 50% probability for
each sample or when total input voxels exceeds a preset threshold to prevent device memory errors.
B.2
ANATOMICAL DATASET DETAILS
In addition to the pathology datasets outlined in 3.2, we generate segmentations for whole-brain
anatomical structures on images from the FSM (Greve et al., 2021), OASIS (Marcus et al., 2007;
LaMontagne et al., 2019), Mind Brain Body (Babayan et al., 2019), IBC (Pinho et al., 2018), CER-
MEP (M´erida et al., 2021), and Forrest Gump (Hanke et al., 2014) cohorts. We select high-quality
acquisitions and thoroughly inspect and correct errors in the label maps. Additionally, we make use
of multiple image atlases with precomputed segmentations (Adil et al., 2021; Pauli et al., 2018).
B.3
ANATOMICAL STRUCTURES
We use segmentations of various anatomical classes, listed below. Bilateral brain structures are
defined by two distinct hemisphere-specific labels.
Global tissue classes include the brain, dura, skull cavity, cerebrum, cerebral white matter, cerebral
cortex, brainstem, cerebellum, ventricular system, and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF).
Brain sub-structure labels include the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, hippocampus, thalamus, cau-
date, putamen, dorsal striatum, globus pallidus (externus and internus), basal ganglia, hypothalamus,
fornix (body, crus, and column), mammillary body, septal nucleus, subthalamic nucleus, habenula,
ventral pallidum, extended amygdala, red nucleus, anterior and posterior commissures, pars com-
pacta, pars reticulata, parabrachial pigmented nucleus, ventral tegmental area, fimbria, septum pellu-
cidum, tectum, pineal gland, superior and inferior colliculus, cerebral peduncle, medullary pyramid,
medial lemniscus, cerebellar peduncle (superior, middle, inferior), cerebellar gray matter, and cere-
bellar white matter.
Ventricular sub-structure labels include the lateral ventricle, inferior lateral ventricle, posterior lat-
eral ventricle, anterior lateral ventricle, atrium, third ventricle, fourth ventricle, interventricular fora-
men, and cerebral aqueduct.
Cortical sub-region labels include the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, occipital lobe, cin-
gulate cortex, insular cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, caudal anterior cingulate cortex, rostral an-
terior cingulate cortex, posterior cingulate cortex, isthmus cingulate cortex, frontal pole, middle
frontal gyrus, caudal middle frontal gyrus, rostral middle frontal gyrus, superior frontal gyrus, infe-
rior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis, pars orbitalis, pars triangularis, lateral orbitofrontal cortex, me-
dial orbitofrontal cortex, precentral gyrus, paracentral lobule, inferior parietal lobule, superior pari-
etal lobule, supramarginal gyrus, precuneus, postcentral gyrus, entorhinal cortex, fusiform gyrus,
parahippocampal gyrus, temporal pole, inferior temporal gyrus, middle temporal gyrus, superior
temporal gyrus, transverse temporal gyrus, cuneus, lingual gyrus, and pericalcarine cortex.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Hoopes et al.
generate noise
attenuate signal
binary threshold
obtain lesion
segmentation mask
in-paint lesion on scan
Figure 5: Schematic of the lesion synthesis procedure. A lesion shape is first generated by attenuat-
ing and thresholding Brownian noise. The resulting segmentation map is resampled into the target
image space, with size and position determined based on anatomical priors. The lesion is in-painted
by pasting the tissue mask into the image with procedurally-generated texture and mean signal in-
tensity based on randomly selected relative tissue characteristics.
B.4
RADIOPAEDIA DATA
We download and annotate 101 patient cases from Radiopaedia, a radiology reference at
https://radiopaedia.org. Each case includes text-based notes and scans in the form of 2D image
slices. We reconstruct volumetric data by stacking these slices and estimating an affine matrix to
map voxel coordinates in world space. We compute this mapping by registering the image to an
average template.
B.5
LESION SYNTHESIS
To extend the range of pathological features observed during training, we synthesize brain lesions
with variable characteristics using a model-based domain randomization technique (Gopinath et al.,
2024). Images spanning diverse acquisition types from 26 subjects in the OASIS, Mind Brain Body,
and CERMEP datasets are paired with whole-brain anatomical segmentation maps as the basis for
this process.
For each synthetic lesion, we first sample parameters describing anatomical location, dimensions,
intensity relative to surrounding tissue, and texture. As illustrated in Figure 5, volumetric multi-
scale Brownian noise is generated with a signal fall-off matched to the sampled lesion dimensions,
then thresholded to produce lobulated structures. These shapes define lesion boundaries, which
are further constrained by anatomical maps. For example, parenchymal lesions are restricted to
white and gray matter, while ventricular lesions are restricted to cerebrospinal fluid spaces. Lesion
interiors are inpainted into the native image using randomly generated textures derived from Perlin
noise. The mean intensity of the inpainted lesion is determined by the underlying healthy image
signal and sampled relative intensity shift.
We also synthesize multiple lesions per subject with varying properties, providing negative examples
for VoxelPrompt to learn to differentiate abnormalities based on descriptive features. In addition, we
simulate heterogeneous lesions by superimposing secondary Brownian noise–derived masks within
an existing lesion, producing intra-lesional components or heterogeneous signal profiles.
C
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND DATA
C.1
SEGMENTATION EVALUATION DATA
In the table below, we summarize the number of unique images from held-out subjects used when
comparing VoxelPrompt segmentation accuracy to SynthSeg (Billot et al., 2023) and individual spe-
cialist models. These evaluations use the same set of anatomical test images (Appendix B.2), so we
group them together below.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
VoxelPrompt
Dice (%)
40
20
0
60
80
100
PediMS
BraTS Meningioma
EPISURG
BHSD
MoME
BiomedParse v2
VoxelPrompt
SAT
Figure 6: Per-subject accuracy for zero-shot lesion segmentation. Subject indices are sorted along
the x-axis in ascending order of VoxelPrompt prediction accuracy. We find that VoxelPrompt consis-
tently achieves high-quality segmentation across all evaluation datasets and lesion types considered.
Table 1: Numbers of held-out test images and subjects corresponding to the whole brain anatomical
segmentation experiment in Section 4.1 and the multi-task training ablation in Section 4.2.
Segmentation Target
Images
Subjects
infarct
206
206
glioma
1376
344
edema
1386
347
cyst
24
11
papilloma
16
6
meningioma
21
8
white matter hyperintensities
40
20
anatomical structures
108
40
C.2
ZERO-SHOT LESION SEGMENTATION BASELINES
Baseline settings. For the pathology segmentation experiments, we evaluate baseline performance
across diverse input configurations to ensure fairness and avoid bias. For both BiomedParse v2 (Zhao
et al., 2025a) and SAT (Zhao et al., 2025b), we explore a range of prompting strategies on each
dataset, following the formats recommended in the original repositories or used during their train-
ing. We test multiple levels of pathology classification terminology and adopt the phrasing that
yields the best performance. BiomedParse v2 does not specify a preferred anatomical orientation,
so we evaluate across all possible orientations and report the best-performing one. We also find that
BiomedParse v2 does not benefit from resampling inputs to isotropic resolution. The MoME (Zhang
et al., 2024) baseline requires skull-stripping and affine alignment to the MNI template prior to pre-
diction. We follow this preprocessing and report MoME’s results in the original coordinate system.
The dataset-specific prompts used as input to language-conditioned methods are described below.
VoxelPrompt
BiomedParse V2
SAT
BraTS menin.
segment the hyperintense mass
MRI imaging of a brain tumor
meningioma
EPISURG
segment the hypointense lesion
MRI imaging of a brain lesion
stroke
BHSD
segment the hyperdense lesions
CT imaging of brain lesions
intracranial hemorrhage
PediMS
segment hyperintensities
MRI imaging of lesions
white matter hyperintensities
Additional results. In Figure 6, we show per-subject performance plots for all methods on zero-
shot lesion segmentation. VoxelPrompt consistently outperforms the baseline foundation models for
brain pathology segmentation.
C.3
SCAN GEOMETRY SAMPLING
To evaluate the efficiency improvements provided by the native-resolution vision network, we sam-
ple test images with spatial geometries drawn from distributions representative of clinical MR and
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Hoopes et al.
CT brain acquisitions. Image dimensions are sampled uniformly around a 155×190×165 mm field
of view, with a max deviation of ±15 mm in each dimension. This range is derived from the 10th
and 90th percentile values of image sizes in our preprocessed datasets.
To reflect real-world voxel resolutions, we consider imaging modalities most frequently collected
in a standard clinical brain imaging session. For each acquisition type, we define uniform sampling
ranges for in-plane resolution and slice separation, based on standard protocol guidelines and em-
pirical resolution distributions observed in our dataset. Voxel spacings are clamped to a minimum of
0.8 mm. During each experimental sample, we randomly select a field of view, acquisition type, and
resolution from these distributions, and randomly populate the volumes with Gaussian noise. This
distribution, outlined below, is not exhaustive, but is designed to provide a representative coverage
of common acquisitions sufficient to evaluate the benefits of native-resolution processing.
in-plane spacing (mm)
slice separation (mm)
T1-weighted (isotropic)
0.8 – 1.2
iso.
T2-weighted
0.8 – 1.0
3.0 – 5.0
FLAIR
0.8 – 1.0
3.0 – 5.0
diffusion-weighted (DWI)
1.5 – 2.5
2.0 – 3.5
gradient-echo (GRE)
0.8 – 1.2
4.0 – 6.0
perfusion MRI
1.5 – 2.5
4.0 – 6.0
susceptibility-weighted (SWI)
0.8 – 1.0
1.5 – 3.0
CT (isotropic)
0.8 – 1.0
iso.
CT (thick slice)
0.8 – 1.0
3.0 – 6.0
C.4
IMAGE SYNTHESIS FOR EVALUATING STREAM INTERACTION
Brain image synthesis techniques are used to train neuroimaging models that are robust to acquisition
variability and anatomical differences (Gopinath et al., 2024). These approaches employ domain
randomization methods (Tobin et al., 2017), in which whole-brain anatomical segmentations are
mapped to randomized tissue intensities, warped by spatial transformations, and augmented with
simulated artifacts. The resulting synthetic images extend beyond the realistic range of clinical
scans, enabling models to generalize across diverse real-world data and tasks (Dey et al., 2024).
We adopt this strategy as a controlled framework for evaluating VoxelPrompt’s ability to integrate
complementary information across arbitrary numbers of input volumes. By generating multiple syn-
thetic images from a single anatomical label map, we test whether segmentation accuracy improves
as additional inputs are provided.
For stream-interaction evaluation, we employ a standard image synthesis protocol widely used in
brain imaging (Gopinath et al., 2024). Briefly, for each evaluation sample, we sample a whole-brain
anatomical segmentation map from a set of OASIS subjects. To generate an individual image from
this segmentation, each label is assigned an intensity distribution defined by Gaussian parameters
sampled uniformly, following a classical Bayesian segmentation formulation. Voxel labels are then
recoded into grayscale values drawn from their respective label distributions, producing synthetic
images. Finally, we apply random artifact simulations, including spatial blurring, additive noise,
and bias-field distortion.
To generate corrupted images, we synthesize random label maps from multi-scale Brownian noise.
Between 10 and 20 noise maps are generated, and voxels are assigned to the index of the maximum-
valued map. This synthetic label map is then converted to an image using the same label-to-intensity
procedure described above.
C.5
STREAM INTERACTION VARIANTS
We compare our attention-based stream interaction module with two reduction-based variants com-
monly used in multi-input medical image analysis (Butoi et al., 2023). In these variants, features are
aggregated across input streams by mean or max pooling along the stream dimension. The result-
ing global feature representation is then concatenated channel-wise with the original stream-specific
features. This combined feature map is passed through a linear projection layer whose output di-
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
VoxelPrompt
mensionality matches that of the block input, ensuring compatibility with the downstream network.
We test both mean and max-reduction as alternative aggregation operations to our proposed attention
mechanism.
To compare interaction mechanisms, we implement vision models matching the VoxelPrompt ar-
chitecture but without language-conditioning blocks, varying only the stream interaction module.
Models are trained on synthetic data (Appendix C.4) using multi-class Soft Dice loss to segment
35 anatomical brain structures. At each training step, between one and three images corresponding
to a single segmentation target are sampled, with a 10% probability of including a corrupted image
(described in Appendix C.4).
For evaluation, we generate 500 synthetic image sets, each containing three images derived from
a held-out test set of 50 subjects and a predefined subset of corrupted images. We evaluate model
performance by varying the number of images provided as input from each set and measuring Dice
overlap between predicted and reference segmentations.
Table 2: On uncorrupted input image sets, attention- and reduction-based stream interaction meth-
ods result in similar model segmentation accuracy (Dice), which improves for all methods as image
inputs are added for a single forward pass.
Method
1 image
2 images
3 images
attention
83.7 ± 2.8
85.8 ± 1.8
86.9 ± 1.4
max-reduction
83.5 ± 2.6
85.8 ± 1.8
87.1 ± 1.5
mean-reduction
83.0 ± 2.7
85.7 ± 1.8
86.7 ± 1.6
D
PATHOLOGY CHARACTERIZATION EXPERIMENT
We evaluate the ability of VoxelPrompt to produce a natural language characterization of image
features. We focus on five pathology-based visual question-answering tasks (also used during train-
ing). These involve classifying lesions based on (1) signal intensity, (2) broad cerebral location, (3)
stroke-affected vascular territory, (4) diffusion restriction, and (5) post-contrast enhancement.
Data. For each of these tasks, we curate a subset of held-out subjects with relevant features, while
ensuring equal representation of possible classification categories in each subset. In total, the evalu-
ation set consists of 102 cases, with per-task breakdowns detailed below.
Classification Task
Images
Subjects
characterize lesion signal intensity
26
26
identify lesion cerebral location
112
30
identify infarct vascular territory
16
12
detect diffusion restriction
28
14
detect post-contrast enhancement
40
20
average across
subtasks
characterize lesion
signal intesity
identify lesion
cerebral location
identify stroke-aﬀected
vascular territory
detect
diﬀusion restriction
detect post-contrast
enhancement
Accuracy (%)
40
60
80
100
RadFM Fine-Tuned
VoxelPrompt
Single-Task Classiﬁers
Figure 7: Accuracy of pathology characterization using natural language for five separate classifi-
cation subtasks. Average subtask accuracy is shown on the left. VoxelPrompt (black) parallels the
performance of individually-trained, single-task classifiers (purple) and a fine-tuned RadFM model
(yellow) – a state-of-the-art method for 3D visual question-answering.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
Hoopes et al.
Evaluation. During evaluation, we consider a prediction as correct if the output natural language
response exactly matches the expected characterization. Using a paired t-test, we compare the Vox-
elPrompt per-task classification accuracy to that of multiple baselines.
Baselines. We compare VoxelPrompt to a set of classifier benchmarks, each trained for one of the
five pathology characterization tasks in T . As opposed to using language, the single-task benchmark
models directly predict label probabilities for a fixed set of task-specific characterizations. We im-
plement these models using the architecture of menc, with ϕ mixing layers replaced. We reduce the
spatial dimensions of the deepest encoder layer output using a global max operator, then compute the
maximum value over all input volume streams. To compute classification probabilities for n possible
descriptions, we pass the stream-pooled features to a fully-connected layer with n output channels
and softmax activation. During benchmark optimization, we use the categorical cross-entropy loss
on these predicted probabilities.
We also compare VoxelPrompt to RadFM (Wu et al., 2025), a publicly released, state-of-the-art
architecture for medical visual question answering that can process multiple 3D images simultane-
ously. In our preliminary experiments, we find that the pretrained RadFM cannot generalize to the
neuroimaging tasks used in this experiment. Therefore, we fine-tune RadFM on our subset of pathol-
ogy characterization tasks, using the training code released with their pretrained model weights. To
fit the optimization within 80 GB of GPU memory, we keep only the first eight hidden transformer
layers of the language model and do not modify any other model components. As required by the vi-
sion transformer, we resize all input volume spatial dimensions to the nearest multiple of 32×32×4.
During fine-tuning, we use only the expected language response (without code) as the target text.
Results. Figure 7 shows that VoxelPrompt achieves an average classification accuracy of 89.0 ±
3.6% over all tasks, matching the performance of the single-task benchmarks (89.3 ± 4.2%) as
well as the fine-tuned RadFM model (87.1 ± 7.9%). These results demonstrate that VoxelPrompt
can achieve language-based image characterization with comparable performance to specialized
classification and medical vision-language architectures, while also able to perform the wide variety
of tasks described in the main experiments.
22
