
===== PAGE 1 =====
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 0(0): 1–4
https://doi.org/10.1007/sxxxxx-yyy-zzzz-1
LETTERS
scInterpreter: Training Large Language Models to Interpret
scRNA-seq Data for Cell Type Annotation
Cong Li2,3, Meng Xiao(B)1, Pengfei Wang1,3, Guihai Feng2, Xin Li2, Yuanchun Zhou1,3
1
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100083, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100101, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100864, China
© Higher Education Press 2024
Abstract
Despite the inherent limitations of existing Large
Language Models in directly reading and interpreting single-
cell omics data, they demonstrate significant potential and
flexibility as the Foundation Model. This research focuses
on how to train and adapt the Large Language Model with
the capability to interpret and distinguish cell types in single-
cell RNA sequencing data. Our preliminary research results
indicate that these foundational models excel in accurately
categorizing known cell types, demonstrating the potential of
the Large Language Models as effective tools for uncovering
new biological insights.
Keywords
Single-Cell Omics Data, Foundation Model, Large
Language Model
1
Introduction
Recent studies [1–4] make significant progress in learning
gene-level and cell-level representation by leveraging large-
scale gene expression data.
However, there are few studies [5] that focus on adopting
the external description and common knowledge from Large
Language Models (LLMs) to enhance the representation. De-
spite the inherent limitations of existing LLMs [6] in directly
Received month dd, yyyy; accepted month dd, yyyy
E-mail: shaow@cnic.cn
reading and interpreting gene expression data, they demon-
strate significant potential and flexibility as the Foundation
Model. This research proposes scInterpreter, which focuses
on utilizing the LLMs with the capability to directly inter-
pret and distinguish cell types in gene expression data. Our
preliminary experiments indicate that scInterpreterexcels in
accurately categorizing known cell types, demonstrating the
potential of the common knowledge in LLMs as an effective
bridge for uncovering biological insights.
2
Methodology
Our proposed method consists of two main parts. The first
part aims to generate the gene-level representation via LLMs
based on the descriptive text of each gene. The target of the
second part is to generate the cell embedding via the specific
gene expression and LLM. After these stages, we could ob-
tain the cell embedding and then feed it into the downstream
task, such as cell-type annotation.
2.1
Gene-level Embedding Initialization
The representation of each gene is initialized with its descrip-
tive texts, which is extracted from the NCBI dataset1). Those
1)https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene
arXiv:2402.12405v1  [q-bio.GN]  18 Feb 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 0(0): 1–4
Instruction Preprocess
Omics Preprocess
Task prompt:
what is the cell type of this given embedding? + <class-token>
MLP
Projection
Llama-13b
Tokenizer
<class-token>
embedding
Generate cell embedding
via GPT text embedding
scRNA-seq
Top-2048
genes
Instruction
embedding
cell
embedding
Llama-13b
(freeze)
ReadOut
MLP
Classification
Gene-level Embedding Initialization
Downstream Task
LLMs as the Gene Interpreter
Sequencing
Instrument
Fig. 1
The pipeline of scInterpreter. The model will first embed each input from the cell and downstream task-specific instruction. Then the cell embedding
and instruction embedding will pass through the LLMs. After aggregating the knowledge and structural information of the given cell by LLMs, the model
ReadOut the representation and then conducts the downstream task.
texts will then be fed into the GPT-3.52) to generate the em-
beddings for each gene, defined as:
e = fgpt(Tdes),
(1)
where Tdes is the description of a given gene, fgpt(·) represents
the text-embedding-ada-002 model in
GPT-3.5, and e is the representation of this gene.
2.2
LLMs as the Gene Interpreter
We select Llama-13b [7] as the based LLM. The cell repre-
sentation then projects to 5120 dimensions through a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) containing to conform to the Llama-
13b’s input dimensions h:
C = MLPp(e1 ⊕e2 ⊕· · · ⊕en),
(2)
where e1 to en represents the ranked top-n expressed genes’
generated embeddings in this cell. ⊕is the element-wise con-
catenate. MLPp is the projection layer with the learnable pa-
rameter. C ∈Rn×h is the embedding of the given cell.
We then pass the cell embedding matrix into the Llama-
13b along with the downstream task instruction, such as ‘what
is the cell type of this given embedding?’. After that, we take
the class-token from the output and feed it into a trainable
classification head:
Eins ⊕C ⊕ecls
LLM
−−−−−−→
ReadOut ˆecls,
(3)
ˆy = Softmax(MLPc(ˆecls)),
(4)
2)https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings
where Eins is the text embedding of the given instruction, ecls
is the embedding of the class-token. After fed into LLM,
scInterpreter will ReadOut the output. For the cell-type an-
notation task, we set the ReadOut operation as directly taking
the class-token embedding from the output. ˆecls is the class-
token embedding after the aggregation within the LLM. ˆy is
the model prediction. During the training process, the Llama
model will be frozen. The projection layer, the classification
head, and the class-token token’s embedding layer will be op-
timized by the cross-entropy loss.
3
Experiment
3.1
Datasets Description
We construct two scRNA-seq datasets. HUMAN-10k com-
prises 10,000 single-cell sequencing records with 61 different
cell types, each having 23,111 genes gene representations.
MOUSE-13k comprises 13,000 records with 37 different cell
types, each having 27,443 gene representations.
3.2
Study of the Cell-type Annotation
Figure 2 reported the classification performance of GenePT
and scInterpreter on the HUMAN-10k and MOUSE-13k. We
used four classification metrics, accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1 score to evaluate two methods. We can observe that
scInterpreter outperformed GenePT on two datasets with a
huge margin. According to the fact that the two compared
methods have the same initial gene embedding, we speculate
that the common knowledge from the large language model

===== PAGE 3 =====
Cong Li et al. scInterpreter: Training Large Language Models to Interpret scRNA-seq Data for Cell Type Annotation
3
GenePT
Ours
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accurcy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Model Performance on HUMAN-10k
(a) HUMAN-10k
GenePT
Ours
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accurcy
Precision
Recall
F1 Score
Model Performance on MOUSE-13k
(b) MOUSE-13k
Fig. 2
The performance comparison between scInterpreter and GenePT
GenePT
Ours
Fig. 3
The confusion matrix of each method on MOUSE-13k.
could provide a better-supervised signal for the downstream
task training, thus resulting in a better performance.
To step further, we reported the confusion matrix of each
method on dataset MOUSE-13k, to show the difference be-
tween the prediction result and the true label. From the left
part of Figure 3, we could observe that most prediction results
were scattered across the matrix, indicating a high degree of
misclassification. The lighter regions of the diagonal suggest
that the model frequently confuses certain cell types with oth-
ers, highlighting deficiencies in either feature representation
or classification capability. In contrast, the right part of the
matrix presents a starkly different scenario, where the ma-
Initial State
GenePT
Ours
Fig. 4
The UMAP illustration of the cell representation from initialization,
GenePT, and scInterpreter on MOUSE-13k.
jority of predictions align closely with the diagonal, thus re-
flecting a high concordance between predicted and actual la-
bels. This phenomenon denotes a significant improvement in
classification accuracy, attributable to the sophisticated fea-
ture encoding and contextual understanding afforded by the
prompt-based training method employed with the large lan-
guage model.
3.3
Study of the Cell Embedding Visualization
Figure 4 reported the UMAP visualization of the cell em-
bedding from the initial state, GenePT, and scInterpreter. In
the initial state of the MOUSE-13k datasets, as observed on
the left side of the visualization, each cell types cluster to-
gether, exhibiting poor separability. The middle visualiza-
tion, i.e. GenePT, shows some improvement in terms of sep-
arability among different categories. However, several cell
types remain interspersed. In contrast, the right visualiza-
tion demonstrates a markedly superior clustering effect. Cells
of the same type exhibit exceptional aggregative properties,
suggesting a high degree of intra-class similarity and inter-
class divergence. The underlying driver is that our proposed
method leverages the broad, generalized knowledge inher-
ent in LLMs to provide more effective supervisory signals,
thereby enhancing the separability of learned cell embeddings.
4
Conclusion
This study represents a preliminary stride in the application
of LLMs for enhancing gene and cell-level representations.
Our proposed scInterpreter harnesses the expansive knowl-
edge base and sophisticated understanding inherent in LLMs
to interpret and categorize cell types in gene expression data.
The superior performance of scInterpreter over GenePT un-
derscores the efficacy of integrating common knowledge from
LLMs into the domain of gene expression analysis.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the Postdoctoral
Fellowship Program of CPSF (No.GZC20232736), the China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation Funded Project (No.2023M743565), the Young Elite
Scientists Sponsorship Program by BAST, and the Special Research Assis-
tant Funded Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Cong Li and Meng
Xiao contributed equally to this work.
References
1.
Cui H, Wang C, Maan H, Pang K, Luo F, Wang B. scgpt: Towards
building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative
ai. bioRxiv, 2023, 2023–04

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 0(0): 1–4
2.
Hao M, Gong J, Zeng X, Liu C, Guo Y, Cheng X, Wang T, Ma J, Song L,
Zhang X. Large scale foundation model on single-cell transcriptomics.
bioRxiv, 2023, 2023–05
3.
Theodoris C V, Xiao L, Chopra A, Chaffin M D, Al Sayed Z R, Hill
M C, Mantineo H, Brydon E M, Zeng Z, Liu X S, others . Transfer
learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature, 2023, 1–9
4.
Yang X, Liu G, Feng G, Bu D, Wang P, Jiang J, Chen S, Yang Q, Zhang
Y, Man Z, others . Genecompass: Deciphering universal gene regulatory
mechanisms with knowledge-informed cross-species foundation model.
bioRxiv, 2023, 2023–09
5.
Chen Y T, Zou J. Genept: A simple but hard-to-beat foundation model
for genes and cells built from chatgpt. bioRxiv, 2023, 2023–10
6.
Ye J, Chen X, Xu N, Zu C, Shao Z, Liu S, Cui Y, Zhou Z, Gong C, Shen
Y, others . A comprehensive capability analysis of gpt-3 and gpt-3.5
series models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10420, 2023
7.
Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux M A, Lacroix
T, Rozi`ere B, Goyal N, Hambro E, Azhar F, others . Llama: Open and
efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
2023
