
===== PAGE 1 =====
2025-5-27
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to
evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Samuel Schmidgall1,2, Rojin Ziaei2, Carl Harris2, Ji Woong Kim2, Eduardo Reis1,3, Jeffrey Jopling2 and
Michael Moor4
1Stanford University, 2Johns Hopkins University, 3Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, 4ETH Zurich
Evaluating large language models (LLM) in clinical scenarios is crucial to assessing their potential
clinical utility. Existing benchmarks rely heavily on static question-answering, which does not accurately
depict the complex, sequential nature of clinical decision-making. Here, we introduce AgentClinic,
a multimodal agent benchmark for evaluating LLMs in simulated clinical environments that include
patient interactions, multimodal data collection under incomplete information, and the usage of various
tools, resulting in an in-depth evaluation across nine medical specialties and seven languages. We find
that solving MedQA problems in the sequential decision-making format of AgentClinic is considerably
more challenging, resulting in diagnostic accuracies that can drop to below a tenth of the original
accuracy. Overall, we observe that agents sourced from Claude-3.5 outperform other LLM backbones
in most settings. Nevertheless, we see stark differences in the LLMs’ ability to make use of tools, such
as experiential learning, adaptive retrieval, and reflection cycles. Strikingly, Llama-3 shows up to 92%
relative improvements with the notebook tool that allows for writing and editing notes that persist
across cases. To further scrutinize our clinical simulations, we leverage real-world electronic health
records, perform a clinical reader study, perturb agents with biases, and explore novel patient-centric
metrics that this interactive environment firstly enables.
§ https://agentclinic.github.io/
1. Introduction
One of the primary goals in Artificial Intelligence (AI) is to build interactive systems that are able to
solve a wide variety of problems. The field of medical AI inherits this aim, with the hope of making
AI systems that are able to solve problems which can improve patient outcomes. Recently, many
general-purpose large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated the ability to solve hard problems,
some of which are considered challenging even for humans (Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023). Among
these, LLMs have quickly surpassed the average human score on the United States Medical Licensing
Exam (USMLE) in a short amount of time, from 38.1% in September 2021 (Gu et al., 2021) to
90.2% in November 2023 (Nori et al., 2023) (human passing score is 60%, human expert score is
87% (Liévin et al., 2023)). While these LLMs are not designed to replace medical practitioners, they
could be beneficial for improving healthcare accessibility and scale for the over 40% of the global
population facing limited healthcare access (Organization et al., 2016) and an increasingly strained
global healthcare system (McIntyre & Chow, 2020).
However, there still remain limitations to these systems that prevent their application in real-world
clinical environments. Recently, LLMs have shown the ability to encode clinical knowledge (Singhal
et al., 2023; Vaid et al., 2023), retrieve relevant medical texts (Xiong et al., 2024), and perform
accurate single-turn medical question-answering (Chen et al., 2023; Liévin et al., 2022; Nori et al.,
2023; Wu et al., 2023). However, clinical work is a multiplexed task that involves sequential decision
making, requiring the doctor to handle uncertainty with limited information and finite resources
while compassionately taking care of patients and obtaining relevant information from them. This
Corresponding author: Samuel Schmidgall (sschmi46@jhu.edu)
arXiv:2405.07960v5  [cs.HC]  25 May 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
capability is not currently reflected in the static multiple choice evaluations (that dominate the recent
literature) where all the necessary information is presented in a case vignettes and where the LLM is
tasked to answer a question, or to just select the most plausible answer choice for a given question.
In this work, we introduce AgentClinic, an open-source multimodal agent benchmark for simu-
lating clinical environments. We improve upon prior work by simulating many parts of the clinical
environment using language agents in addition to patient and doctor agents. Through the interaction
with a measurement agent, doctor agents can perform simulated medical exams (e.g. temperature,
blood pressure, EKG) and order medical image readings (e.g. MRI, X-ray) through dialogue. We also
support the ability for agents to exhibit 24 different biases that are known to be present in clinical
environments. We also present environments from 9 medical specialties, 7 different languages, and a
study on incorporating various agent tools and reasoning techniques. Furthermore, our evaluation
metrics go beyond diagnostic accuracy by giving emphasis to the patient agents with measures like
patient compliance and consultation ratings.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
1. We challenge how large language and vision models should be evaluated for medical diagnosis
with the introduction of AgentClinic. These diagnostic challenges are not static QAs, but
are interactive, dialogue-driven, sequential decision making environments that require data
collection, ordering appropriate medical exams, and understanding medical images across
patients with unique family histories, lifestyle habits, age categories, and diseases.
2. A system for incorporating complex biases that can affect the dialogue and decisions of patient
and doctor agents. We present results on diagnostic accuracy and patient perception for
agents that are affected by cognitive and implicit biases. We find that doctor and patient
biases can lower diagnostic accuracy, affect the patient’s willingness to follow through with
treatment (compliance), reduce patient’s confidence in their doctor, and lower willingness for
follow-up consultations.
3. We introduce patient agents built from real clinical cases sourced from electronic health record
data, including an agent-based system for providing simulated medical exams (e.g. temperature,
blood pressure, EKG) based on realistic disease test findings. We also introduce patient cases
from nine medical specialties and seven multilingual environments to better support specialist
applications and diverse language backgrounds. We also present realism and empathy ratings
from clinicians for the resulting dialogue.
4. We allow doctor agents to use a variety of tools, such as browsing the web, textbooks, perform
reflection cycles, take and edit notes in a notebook that persists over different patient scenarios.
We show that current LLMs vastly differ in how much they benefit from these tools, with some
models demonstrating large accuracy increases while others decrease in accuracy.
2. AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark for clinical decision making
In this section we describe AgentClinic, which uses LLM agents to simulate a clinical environment.
Language agents
Four language agents are used in the AgentClinic benchmark: a patient agent,
doctor agent, measurement agent, and a moderator (Figure 1). Each language agent has specific
instructions and is provided unique information that is only available to that particular agent. These
instructions are provided to an LLM which carries out their particular role. The doctor agent serves
as the model whose performance is being evaluated, and the other three agents serve to provide this
evaluation. A detailed description of each agent is provided in Appendix A.1.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 1 | Running language agents in AgentClinic. (Left) Workflow diagram of agents in AgentClinic.
The doctor agent interacts with tools and agents in order to arrive at a diagnosis. Moderator agent
compares conclusion to ground truth diagnosis at the end of the simulation. (Right) Example dialogue
between agents in the AgentClinic benchmark.
Language agent biases
Previous work has indicated that LLMs can display racial biases (Omiye
et al., 2023) and might also lead to incorrect diagnoses due to inaccurate patient feedback (Ziaei &
Schmidgall, 2023). Additionally, it has been found that the presence of prompts which induce cognitive
biases can decrease the diagnostic accuracy of LLMs by as much as 26% (Schmidgall et al., 2024).
The biases presented in this work intend to mimic cognitive biases that affect medical practitioners
in clinical settings. However, these biases were quite simple, presenting a cognitive bias snippet at
the beginning of each question (e.g. “Recently, there was a patient with similar symptoms that you
diagnosed with permanent loss of smell"). This form of presentation did not allow for the bias to present
in a realistic way, which is typically subtle and through interaction.
We present clinically relevant biases that have been studied in other works from two categories:
cognitive and implicit biases (Fig. 7). Cognitive biases are systematic patterns of deviation from
rational judgment, such as recency bias, where recent cases disproportionately influence clinical
decisions, or anchoring bias, where early diagnostic impressions overly dictate later assessments.
Implicit biases, on the other hand, are unconscious associations shaped by societal and cultural norms.
These include biases based on race, gender, or socioeconomic status, which can subtly influence the
quality of patient interactions and treatment plans. These biases are introduced by adding context
into the agent’s system prompt instructing them to play out that bias as part of their role. For instance,
to simulate sexual orientation bias, the patient agent receives the prompt: “You are uncomfortable
with your doctor because you find out that they are a particular sexual orientation and you do not trust
their judgement. This affects how you interact with them." This is discussed in Appendix A.2.
Building agents for AgentClinic
In order to build agents that are grounded in medically relevant
situations, we use a random sample of diagnostic questions from the US Medical Licensing Exam
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 2 | Accuracy of various doctor language models and human physicians on AgentClinic-MedQA
using GPT-4 patient and measurement agents (left). Accuracy of GPT-4 on AgentClinic-MedQA based
on patient language model (middle). Accuracy on AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV by number of using GPT-4
patient and measurement agents (right).
(USMLE), from deidentified electronic health records (MIMIC-IV) (Johnson et al. (2023)), and from
the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM) case challenges. These questions are concerned with
diagnosing a patient based on a list of symptoms, which we use in order to build the Objective
Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) template that our agents are prompted with. For AgentClinic-
MedQA and AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV, we first select from a sample of questions from the MedQA
and MIMIC-IV dataset respectively and then populate a structured JSON formatted file containing
information about the case study (e.g. test results, patient history) which is used as input to each
of the agents. The exact structure of this file is demonstrated in Appendix I as well as an example
case study shown in Appendix J. In general, we separate information by what is provided to each
agent, including the objective for the doctor, patient history and symptoms for the patient, physical
examination findings for the measurement, and the correct diagnosis for the moderator. We initially
use an LLM (GPT-4) to populate the structured JSON, and then manually validate each of the case
scenarios. For AgentClinic-NEJM we select a curated sample of 120 questions from NEJM case
challenges and proceed with the same template formatting as AgentClinic-MedQA/MIMIC-IV.
Multilingual and Specialist cases
Multilingual patient cases are converted from AgentClinic-MedQA
to the the target language using GPT-4 and then manually corrected by native speakers. Agents are
then prompted to perform dialogue in the target language. We chose to focus on six languages:
Chinese, Hindi, Korean, Spanish, French, and Persian. The selection of these languages aims to
address the need for medical AI systems capable of operating in multilingual healthcare environments.
Specialist cases use case report questions from the MedMCQA dataset (Pal et al. (2022)). These
questions include case reports from 20 different medical specialties, from which we chose to focus
on 9 patient-focused specialties in AgentClinic-Spec: emergency medicine, geriatrics, pharmacology,
internal medicine, psychiatry, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, and pediatrics.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 3 | Comparison of accuracy of models on MedQA and AgentClinic-MedQA. We find that MedQA
accuracy is not predictive of accuracy on AgentClinic-MedQA.
3. Results
3.1. Comparison of models
Here we discuss the accuracy of various language models on AgentClinic-MedQA. We evaluate 11
models in total: Claude-3.5-Sonnet, GPT-4, GPT-4o, Mixtral-8x7B, GPT-3.5, Llama 3 70B-Instruct,
Llama 2 70B-chat, MedLlama3-8B, PMC-Llama-7B, Meditron-70B, and OpenBioLLM-70B (model
details discussed in Appendix C). Each model acts as the doctor agent, attempting to diagnose
the patient agent through dialogue. The doctor agent is allowed N=20 patient and measurement
interactions before a diagnosis must be made. We also evaluate human physician performance
collected from three physicians, provided the same instructions and constraints as the LLMs. For
this evaluation, we use GPT-4 as the patient agent for consistency. The accuracy of each models is
presented in Figure 2: Claude-3.5 62.1% ± 3.3, OpenBioLLM-70B 58.3 ± 4.2, Human Physicians 54
± 28.5, GPT-4 at 51.6% ± 3.3, Mixtral-8x7B at 37.1% ± 3.1, GPT-3.5 at 36.6%, GPT-4o 34.2% ± 3.4,
MedLlama3-8B 31.4 ± 2.9, PMC-Llama 7B 23.6 ± 2.1, Meditron 70B 29.1 ± 2.4, MedLlama3-8B 31.4
± 2.9, Llama 3 70B at 19% ± 2.5, and Llama 2 at 70B-chat 4.5% ± 1.3. Confidence intervals for all
experiments are provided in Appendix D.
We use the same configuration for AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV, with model accuracy presented in Figure
2: Claude-3.5 42.9% ± 3.3, GPT-4 34.0% ± 3.1, GPT-3.5 27.5% ± 3.0, Mixtral-8x7B 29.5% ± 3.1,
GPT-4o 24.0% ± 2.9, Llama 3 70B 8.5% ± 1.9, Llama 2 70B-chat 13.5% ± 2.2, OpenBioLLM-70B
38.1 ± 3.2, PMC-Llama 7B 34.3 ± 3.0, Meditron 70B 25.5 ± 2.43, and MedLlama3-8B 29.7 ± 2.6.
We also find that the diagnostic accuracy in AgentClinic-MedQA is influenced by both the amount
of interaction time and the choice of patient language model. Reducing the number of interactions
from N=20 to N=10 significantly decreases accuracy from 52% to 25%, likely due to insufficient
information being gathered, while increasing N beyond 20 to N=30 slightly reduces accuracy, possibly
due to the complexity of processing larger inputs (Appendix F.1). Additionally, the choice of patient
agent affects accuracy, with GPT-4 (52%) patient agents leading to higher diagnostic accuracy than
GPT-3.5 (48%) or Mixtral (46%) agents, likely because GPT-4 provides more detailed responses
(Appendix F.2). Interestingly, when a GPT-3.5 doctor interacts with a GPT-4 patient, accuracy is
marginally higher than when both doctor and patient are GPT-3.5, which may suggest challenges in
cross-model communication (Panickssery et al. (2024)).
We also show results comparing the accuracy of these models on MedQA and AgentClinic-MedQA
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
in Figure 3. Overall, MedQA accuracy was only weakly predictive of accuracy on AgentClinic-MedQA.
These results align with studies performed on medical residents, which show that the USMLE is poorly
predictive of resident performance (Lombardi et al., 2023).
3.2. How does bias affect the diagnostic accuracy of the doctor agent?
For bias evaluations we test GPT-4 as well as Mixtral-8x7B. The normalized accuracy for these
experiments are shown in Figure 4 represented as Accuracybias / AccuracyNo Bias (between 0-100%).
GPT-4 and Mixtral-8x7B have an unbiased accuracy equal to 52% and 37% respectively. For GPT-4,
we find that cognitive bias results in a larger reduction in accuracy with a normalized accuracy of
92% (absolute accuracy drops from 52% accuracy to 48%) for patient cognitive biases and 96.7%
for doctor cognitive biases (absolute drops from 52% to 50.3%). For implicit biases, we find that
the patient agent was less affected with a normalized accuracy of 98.6% (absolute drops from 52%
to 51.3%), however, the doctor agent was affected as much as cognitive biases with an average of
97.1% (absolute drops from 52% to 50.5%). For cognitive bias, the demonstration was occasionally
quite clear in the dialogue, with the patient agent overly focusing on a particular ailment or some
unimportant fact. Similarly, the doctor agent would occasionally focus on irrelevant information.
Mixtral-8x7B has an average accuracy of 37% without instructed bias, and a normalized accuracy
of 83.7% (absolute from 37% to 31%) for doctor biases and 89% (absolute from 37% to 33%) for
patient biases. For implicit bias we find a much larger drop in accuracy than GPT-4, with an average
accuracy of 88.3% (absolute from 37% to 32.7%). There is a similar reduction in accuracy for both
doctor and patient, but a 4% reduction when the patient has implicit bias, likely because the patient
is less willing to share information with the doctor if they do not trust them. For cognitive bias, there
is an average accuracy of 86.4% (absolute from 37% to 32%) with the doctor agent having a very low
accuracy of 78.4% (absolute from 37% to 29%) and the patient has only a modest decrease to 94.5%
(absolute from 37% to 35%).
Upon reviewing dialogues where Mixtral-8x7B’s performance degraded under biases, we observed
that the model often failed to gather critical patient information due to misinterpretation of patient
cues influenced by bias. For example, in cases of cognitive bias, the doctor agent fixated on a recent
diagnosis (recency bias), ignoring new symptoms presented later in the dialogue. In implicit bias
scenarios, the doctor agent showed reluctance to order necessary tests for patients with racial bias,
reflecting a disparity in care. In contrast, GPT-4 was actively seeking additional information when
initial hypotheses did not align with new data, indicating better handling of bias-induced scenarios.
Previous work studying cognitive bias in LLMs has shown that GPT-4 is relatively robust to bias
compared with other language models (Schmidgall et al., 2024). Results from evaluating GPT-4
on AgentClinic-MedQA show only small drops in accuracy with the introduced biases (maximum
absolute accuracy reduction of 4%, average reduction of 1.5%). While this reduction can be quite
large in the field of medicine, it is a much smaller drop than was observed in previous work (10.2%
maximum reduction on BiasMedQA dataset (Schmidgall et al., 2024)). This might be due to the model
being superficially overly-aligned to human values, plausibly leading GPT-4 to not serve as a good
model for representing human bias in agent benchmarks as the model may reject to execute on bias
instructions (which does not mean that GPT-4 is free of said biases). For example, in our evaluations
with gender bias we observed 25 occurrences (out of 215 dialogues) where GPT-4 verbosely rejected
to follow through with a bias-related instruction. Mixtral-8x7B saw much larger drops in accuracy
than GPT-4 in the presence of bias, and thus might serve as a better model for studying bias.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 4 | (Top) Demonstration of normalized accuracy (Accuracybias / AccuracyNo Bias) with implicit
and cognitive biases with GPT-4 (green) and Mixtral-8x7B (orange). GPT-4 accuracy was not suscep-
tible to biases, whereas Mixtral-8x7B was. (Bottom) Ratings provided after diagnosis from GPT-4
patient agents with presented biases. Left. Patient confidence in doctor. Middle. Patient compliance,
indicating self-reported willingness to follow up with therapy. Right. Patient consultation rating,
indicating willingness to consult with this doctor again.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
3.3. Bias and patient agent perception
While GPT-4’s diagnostic accuracy does not reduce as much as Mixtral-8x7B, it is also worth inves-
tigating the perceived quality of care from the perspective of the patient agent. In order to better
understand the effect of bias on the patient agent, after the patient-doctor dialogue is completed, we
ask every patient agent three questions:
1. Confidence: Please provide a confidence between 1-10 in your doctor’s assessment.
2. Compliance: Please provide a rating between 1-10 indicating how likely you are to follow up
with therapy for your diagnosis.
3. Consultation: Please provide a rating between 1-10 indicating how likely you are to consult
again with this doctor.
Such patient-agent-centric follow-up queries offer a more fine-grained and multi-faceted characteri-
zation of the clinical skills of a language agent—as opposed to static multiple choice benchmarks.
Although these metrics are derived from simulated agents (rather than humans), this analysis aims
to provide insights into how simulated biases may affect patient trust and compliance, which are
important factors in effective healthcare delivery. The corresponding results are shown in Figure 4
(prompt details in Appendix E.2). While diagnostic accuracy demonstrates a relatively small drop in
accuracy, the patient agent follow-up perceptions tell a different story. Broadly, we find that most
patient cognitive biases did not have a strong effect on any of the patient perceptions when compared
to an unbiased patient agent except for in the case of self-diagnosis, which had sizeable drops in
confidence (4.7 points) and consultation (2 points), and a minor drop in compliance (1 point).
However, implicit biases had a profound effect on on all three categories of patient perception, with
education bias consistently reducing patient perception across all three categories.
We found that between the implicit biases, sexual orientation bias had the lowest effect on patient
perceptions, followed by racial bias and gender bias. For patient confidence, gender bias is followed by
religion socioeconomic, cultural, and education, whereas patient compliance and patient consultation,
it is followed by cultural, socioeconomic, religion, and education. While it is not quantifiable, we
decided to ask two biased patient agents who provided low rating with education and gender biases
for compliance why they provided low ratings (Appendix E.1). These patient agents had the same
symptoms and diagnosis and only differed in bias presentation.
It is important to note that the patient agents used in our study are simulated by language models,
which may not fully capture the complexity and variability of real human patients. As such, the
confidence, compliance, and consultation ratings provided by these agents may not perfectly reflect
real-world patient perceptions, rather, provide insight into how real-world bias can be studied through
clinical simulations.
3.4. Specialist and Multilingual Cases
We now focus on specialist rather than general medical cases. Specialist cases use reports that are
derived from datasets focusing on specific medical specialties (e.g., internal medicine, psychiatry) and
are designed to simulate complex diagnostic scenarios requiring in-depth expertise. In contrast, general
QA tasks involve static, single-turn multiple-choice questions such as those found in medical licensing
exams. An analysis of language model performance across nine medical specialties reveals significant
differences in diagnostic accuracy (Table 5). Claude 3.5 achieved the highest overall performance
with an average accuracy of 66.7%, excelling in Internal Medicine (78.3%), Otolaryngology (76.7%),
and Gynecology (74.3%). GPT-4 demonstrated strong performance in Gynecology (68.5%) and
Ophthalmology (65.2%) but showed reduced accuracy in Emergency Medicine (32.3%) and Geriatrics
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 5 | Diagnostic accuracy based on language (Left), based on medical specialty (Middle), and
based on agent tools (Right).
(40%). GPT-3.5 outperformed some newer models in specific areas, such as Emergency Medicine
(41.9%), and maintained an average accuracy of 51.8%. In contrast, Llama3-70b and GPT-4o-mini
consistently underperformed across most specialties, highlighting a significant gap between language
models in handling specialist medical tasks.
The variations in performance across different medical domains suggest that certain specialties
present more challenges for language models. Specialties like Internal Medicine and Gynecology
generally saw higher accuracy rates, which contrasts with existing medical QA literature that identifies
Psychiatry and Otolaryngology as the least challenging specialties (Pal et al. (2022)). This discrepancy
may indicate inherent difficulties in diagnosing diseases through dialogue-based interactions as
opposed to multiple-choice question formats. Additionally, specialist cases sourced from MedMCQA
exhibited higher average accuracy compared to non-specialist cases from MedQA, which differs from
reported multiple choice evaluations where specialist QAs typically have lower performance (Nori
et al. (2023)).
We also explore the impact of language on diagnostic accuracy using AgentClinic-Lang, which
encompassed seven languages: English, Chinese, French, Spanish, Hindi, Persian, and Korean (Table
4). Six multilingual models were evaluated, including GPT-4, GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-3.5, Llama 3
70B-Instruct, and Claude 3.5 Sonnet. Overall, all models performed best in English, with performance
varying significantly across other languages. Claude 3.5 Sonnet stood out by maintaining high and
consistent performance across all languages, achieving an average accuracy of 48.4%, which is more
than double that of the next best model, GPT-4, at 20.9%.
Other models exhibited considerable variability in performance across different languages. For
example, GPT-4’s accuracy ranged from 11.21% in Chinese to 40.18% in English, while GPT-4o’s
performance spanned from 3.73% in Korean to 35.5% in English. GPT-3.5 showed a similar pattern,
with accuracies ranging from 1.86% in Persian to 36.3% in English, although it performed relatively
well in Korean (35.4%). Llama3-70b and GPT-4o-mini also showed low accuracies across most
languages, with Llama3-70b’s highest accuracy being 47.8% in Ophthalmology and GPT-4o-mini
achieving a maximum of 14.7% in Orthopaedics. Notably, Chinese remained a challenging language
for most models, except for Claude 3.5 Sonnet, which maintained relatively high accuracy levels
across all tested languages.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
3.5. Comparing tools from the Agent Toolbox
This section evaluates the impact of six agent tools—Zero-Shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT), One-Shot
CoT, Reflection CoT, Adaptive RAG (Book), Adaptive RAG (Web), and Notebook—on the diagnostic
accuracy of various language models (tools further described in Appendix K). Claude 3.5 achieved
the highest overall performance with an average accuracy of 51.3%, peaking at 56.1% when using the
Notebook tool (Table 6). GPT-4 and GPT-4o showed moderate improvements with most tools, with
GPT-4 benefiting most from Adaptive RAG (Web) at 43.9% and GPT-4o gaining the most from the
Notebook tool at 43.0%. Notably, GPT-4 reached its highest accuracy of 42.2% with Reflection CoT,
surpassing Claude 3.5 in this specific tool. In contrast, GPT-3.5 experienced decreased performance
across all tools, particularly with Adaptive RAG (Book), which led to a 27.1% drop. Llama3-70b
demonstrated significant improvements, averaging a 9.4% increase across all tools, with the Notebook
and Reflection CoT tools boosting its accuracy to 41.1%.
Overall, the findings indicate a hierarchy in model performance, with Claude 3.5 consistently
outperforming other models across most tools, except in the case of Reflection CoT where GPT-4
excels. Llama3-70b showed notable gains with certain tools, while GPT-4o-mini had mixed results,
benefiting from some tools like Reflection CoT and Adaptive RAG (Web) but showing slight decreases
with others. The relative impact of each tool varied significantly between models, aligning with
previous research on the use of tools with large language models (Ma et al. (2024); Qin et al. (2024)).
The tool descriptions and prompts are in Appendix K and Appendix M respectively.
3.6. Human dialogue ratings
AgentClinic introduces an evaluation for LLMs patient diagnosis. However, the realism of the actual
dialogue itself has yet to be evaluated. We present results from three human clinicians (individuals
with MDs) who rated dialogues from 20 agents on AgentClinic-MedQA from 1-10 across four axes:
1. Doctor: How realistically the doctor played the given case.
2. Patient: How realistically the patient played the given case.
3. Measurement: How accurate & realistic the measurement reader reflects actual case results.
4. Empathy: How empathetic the doctor agent was in their conversation with the patient agent.
We find the average ratings from evaluators for each category as follows: Doctor 6.2, Patient 6.7,
Measurement 6.3, and Empathy 5.8 (Fig. 8). We find from review comments that the lower rating
for the doctor agent stems from several points such as providing a bad opening statement, making
basic errors, overly focusing on a particular diagnostic, or not being diligent enough. For the patient
agent, comments were made on them being overly verbose and unnecessarily repeating the question
back to the doctor agent. The measurement agent was noted to occasionally not return all of the
necessary values for a test (e.g. the following comment “Measurement only returns Hct and Lc for
CBC. Measurement did not return Factor VIII or IX levels / assay"). Regarding empathy, the doctor
agent adopts a neutral tone and does not open the dialogue with an inviting question. Instead, it cuts
right to the chase, immediately focusing on the patient’s current symptoms and medical history (see
Appendix O for more details).
3.7. Diagnostic accuracy in a multimodal environment
Many types of diagnoses require the physician to visually inspect the patient, such as with infections
and rashes. Additionally, imaging tools such as X-ray, CT, and MRI provide a detailed and rich view
into the patient, with hospitalized patients receiving an average of 1.42 diagnostic images per patient
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
stay (Smith-Bindman et al., 2012). However, the previous experiments in this work and prior work (Tu
et al., 2024) provided measurement results through text, and did not explore the ability of the model
to understand visual context. Here, we evaluate four multimodal LLMs, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, GPT-4o,
GPT-4 and GPT-4o-mini, in a diagnostic settings that require interacting through both dialogue as well
as understanding image readings. We collect our questions from New England Journal of Medicine
(NEJM) case challenges. These published cases are presented as diagnostic challenges from real
medical scenarios, and have an associated pathology-confirmed diagnosis. We randomly sample 120
challenges from a sample of 932 total cases for AgentClinic-NEJM. While for human viewers, these
cases are provided with a set of multiple choice answers, we chose to not provide these options to the
doctor agent and instead keep the problems open-ended.
Figure 6 | Accuracy of Claude 3.5 Sonnet, GPT-4, GPT-4o, and GPT-
4o-mini on AgentClinic-NEJM with multimodal text and language
input. (Pink) Accuracy when the images are presented as initial
input. (Blue) Accuracy when images must be requested from the
image reader.
The goal of this experiment
is to understand how accuracy
differs when the LLM is required
to understand an image in addi-
tion to interacting through pa-
tient dialogue.
We allow for
20 doctor inferences, and con-
dition the patient in the same
way as previous experiment with
the addition of an image that
is provided to the doctor agent.
The mechanism for receiving im-
age input in AgentClinic-NEJM
is supported in two ways: pro-
vided initially to the doctor
agent upon initialization and as
feedback from the instrument
agent upon request.
When the image is provided
initially to the doctor agent,
across 120 multimodal patient
settings we find that Claude 3.5
Sonnet obtains an accuracy of
37.2 ± 2.2, GPT-4 obtains 27.7% ± 2.0, GPT-4o obtains 21.4% ± 1.7 and GPT-4o-mini obtain an
accuracy of 8.0% ± 1.2 (Fig. 6). We also find that for the provided incorrect responses from GPT-4,
the answer that was provided was among those listed in the multiple choice options 60% of the time.
In the case of when images are provided upon request from the instrument agent we find that Claude
3.5 Sonnet obtains an accuracy of 35.4 ± 2.4 , GPT-4 obtains 25.4% ± 2.1, GPT-4o obtains 19.1%
± 1.4 and GPT-4o-mini obtains 6.1% ± 1.2 (Fig. 6). A accuracy breakdown based on image type is
provided in Appendix N.
4. Discussion
In this work, we present AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark for simulating clinical en-
vironments. We design 120 multimodal language agents which require an understanding of both
language and images and 215 language agents based on cases from the USMLE. We also introduce 260
patient cases from 9 medical specialties and 749 patient cases from 7 multilingual environments. We
instructed these agents to exhibit 23 different biases, with either the doctor or patient presenting bias.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Notably, models like GPT-4 demonstrated resilience to cognitive and implicit biases, maintaining high
diagnostic accuracy, while others like Mixtral-8x7B experienced significant performance degradation.
We also find that doctor and patient biases can reduce diagnostic accuracy, and that the patient
has a lower willingness to follow up with treatment, reduced confidence in their doctor, and lower
willingness to have a follow-up consultation in the presence of bias. Tool use, such as adaptive retrieval
and reflection cycles, revealed substantial differences in LLMs’ abilities to enhance their performance,
with models like Llama 3 showing up to 19.7% improvement.
Our work only presents a simplified clinical environments that include agents representing a
patient, doctor, measurements, and a moderator. One potential limitation of the presented workflow
comes from the use of an LLM for determining accuracy via the moderator agent (albeit, provided a
ground truth). Recent research Zheng et al. (2023) has shown that strong LLM judges like GPT-4 can
match both controlled and crowd-sourced human preferences well, achieving over 80% agreement,
which is the same level of agreement between humans, indicating the use of an LLM may not be
limiting. Additionally, while the measurement agent adds a flexible interface for gathering medical
exam results, its reliance on using an LLM to provide results may introduce errors or hallucinations,
which could be mitigated through a database or SQL tool. In future work, we will consider including
additional critical actors such as nurses, the relatives of patients, administrators, and insurance
contacts. There may be additional advantages to creating agents that are embodied in a simulated
world like in Li et al. (2024); Park et al. (2023), so that physical constraints can be considered, such
as making decisions with limited hospital space. Additionally, future work could explore the role of
demographic biases, such as race and gender (details of MIMIC-IV demographics in Appendix H.1)
Another limitation of our evaluations is the uncertainty regarding the training data of proprietary
models like GPT-4 and Claude 3.5. It’s possible that these models were trained on datasets like MedQA,
potentially giving them an unfair advantage due to data leakage. While our results showing that
MedQA performance is not predictive of AgentClinic-MedQA accuracy (Figure 3) provides evidence
that this may not be an issue, it is possible that GPT-4/4o/3.5 or Claude 3.5 could have been trained
on the MedQA test set. Currently, Mixtral-8x7B (Jiang et al., 2024) and Llama 2-70B-Chat (Touvron
et al., 2023) do not report training on the MedQA test or train set. Future work should focus on
developing evaluation datasets that are less likely to have been included in pre-training corpora
or on collaborating with model developers to ensure fair assessments. Another limitation for the
experiments on varying the patient LLM suggest that their may be an advantage for LLMs which act
as both the patient and the doctor agent, because LLMs are able to recognize their own text with
high accuracy, and display disproportionate preference to that text (Panickssery et al., 2024).
Previous benchmarks like AMIE (Tu et al., 2024), SAPS Liao et al. (2024), and CRAFT-MD
(Johri et al., 2023) focus on dialogue-based evaluations but lack multimodal capabilities and do not
simulate real-world biases, tool usage, multilingual, or specialist cases. MedAgents (Tang et al., 2023)
emphasizes QA improvement through agent collaboration but does not simulate patient interactions
or decision-making processes. AgentClinic advances the field by providing an interactive, multimodal
environment with bias simulation and tool integration, offering a more comprehensive evaluation
platform for medical AI systems.
Overall, we believe that LLMs need to be examined with novel evaluation strategies that go well
beyond static question-answering benchmarks. With this work, we take a step towards building more
interactive, operationalized, and dialogue-driven benchmarks that scrutinize the sequential decision
making ability of language agents in various challenging and multimodal clinical settings.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
References
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to
retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.
Jennifer S Blumenthal-Barby and Heather Krieger. Cognitive biases and heuristics in medical decision
making: a critical review using a systematic search strategy. Medical Decision Making, 35(4):
539–557, 2015.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Crystal Tin-Tin Chang, Hodan Farah, Haiwen Gui, Shawheen Justin Rezaei, Charbel Bou-Khalil,
Ye-Jean Park, Akshay Swaminathan, Jesutofunmi A Omiye, Akaash Kolluri, Akash Chaurasia, et al.
Red teaming large language models in medicine: Real-world insights on model behavior. medRxiv,
pp. 2024–04, 2024.
Zeming Chen, Alejandro Hernández Cano, Angelika Romanou, Antoine Bonnet, Kyle Matoba,
Francesco Salvi, Matteo Pagliardini, Simin Fan, Andreas Köpf, Amirkeivan Mohtashami,
et al.
Meditron-70b: Scaling medical pretraining for large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.16079, 2023.
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factuality
and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325,
2023.
John W Ely, Jerome A Osheroff, Mark H Ebell, George R Bergus, Barcey T Levy, M Lee Chambliss,
and Eric R Evans. Analysis of questions asked by family doctors regarding patient care. Bmj, 319
(7206):358–361, 1999.
Chloë FitzGerald and Samia Hurst. Implicit bias in healthcare professionals: a systematic review.
BMC medical ethics, 18:1–18, 2017.
Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, and
Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.
Dipesh P Gopal, Ula Chetty, Patrick O’Donnell, Camille Gajria, and Jodie Blackadder-Weinstein.
Implicit bias in healthcare: clinical practice, research and decision making. Future healthcare
journal, 8(1):40, 2021.
Ojas Gramopadhye, Saeel Sandeep Nachane, Prateek Chanda, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Kshitij Sharad
Jadhav, Yatin Nandwani, Dinesh Raghu, and Sachindra Joshi. Few shot chain-of-thought driven rea-
soning to prompt llms for open ended medical question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04890,
2024.
Yu Gu, Robert Tinn, Hao Cheng, Michael Lucas, Naoto Usuyama, Xiaodong Liu, Tristan Naumann,
Jianfeng Gao, and Hoifung Poon. Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical
natural language processing. ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare (HEALTH), 3(1):1–23,
2021.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
M Elizabeth H Hammond, Josef Stehlik, Stavros G Drakos, and Abdallah G Kfoury. Bias in medicine:
lessons learned and mitigation strategies. Basic to Translational Science, 6(1):78–85, 2021.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300,
2020.
Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford,
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. Mixtral of
experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang,
Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig.
Active retrieval augmented generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06983, 2023.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. What disease
does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical exams.
Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421, 2021.
Qiao Jin, Bhuwan Dhingra, Zhengping Liu, William W Cohen, and Xinghua Lu. Pubmedqa: A dataset
for biomedical research question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06146, 2019.
Alistair EW Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng, Tom J
Pollard, Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, et al. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic
health record dataset. Scientific data, 10(1):1, 2023.
Shreya Johri, Jaehwan Jeong, Benjamin A Tran, Daniel I Schlessinger, Shannon Wongvibulsin,
Zhuo Ran Cai, Roxana Daneshjou, and Pranav Rajpurkar. Guidelines for rigorous evaluation
of clinical llms for conversational reasoning. medRxiv, pp. 2023–09, 2023.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
22199–22213, 2022.
Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang
Liu. Agent hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable medical agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.02957, 2024.
Yusheng Liao, Yutong Meng, Yuhao Wang, Hongcheng Liu, Yanfeng Wang, and Yu Wang. Automatic
interactive evaluation for large language models with state aware patient simulator. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.08495, 2024.
Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, and Ole Winther. Can large language models reason
about medical questions? arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08143, 2022.
Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, Andreas Geert Motzfeldt, and Ole Winther. Can large
language models reason about medical questions? Patterns, 2023.
Conner V Lombardi, Neejad T Chidiac, Benjamin C Record, and Jeremy J Laukka. Usmle step 1 and
step 2 ck as indicators of resident performance. BMC Medical Education, 23(1):543, 2023.
Zixian Ma, Weikai Huang, Jieyu Zhang, Tanmay Gupta, and Ranjay Krishna. m&m’s: A benchmark to
evaluate tool-use for multi-step multi-modal tasks. In Synthetic Data for Computer Vision Workshop@
CVPR 2024, 2024.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Daniel McIntyre and Clara K Chow. Waiting time as an indicator for health services under strain: a
narrative review. INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing, 57:
0046958020910305, 2020.
Donald E Melnick, Gerard F Dillon, and David B Swanson. Medical licensing examinations in the
united states. Journal of dental education, 66(5):595–599, 2002.
Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolo Fusi, Nicholas King,
Jonathan Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, et al. Can generalist foundation models outcompete
special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452, 2023.
Jesutofunmi A Omiye, Jenna C Lester, Simon Spichak, Veronica Rotemberg, and Roxana Daneshjou.
Large language models propagate race-based medicine. NPJ Digital Medicine, 6(1):195, 2023.
OpenAI, :, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni
Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor
Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mo Bavarian, Jeff Belgum,
Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg
Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage,
Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory
Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason
Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings,
Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville,
Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou,
David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo
Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes,
Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu,
Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke,
Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli
Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang,
Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali
Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo,
Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal
Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel
Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna
Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie
Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan,
Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela
Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk,
David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo,
Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley
Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov,
Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde
de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power,
Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron
Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder,
Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr,
John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker,
Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl,
Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth
Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun
Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt
Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman, Sherwin
Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba,
Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang,
William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
World Health Organization et al. Health workforce requirements for universal health coverage and
the sustainable development goals. World Health Organization, 2016.
Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. Medmcqa: A large-scale multi-
subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Conference on health,
inference, and learning, pp. 248–260. PMLR, 2022.
Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R. Bowman, and Shi Feng. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their own
generations, 2024.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1–22, 2023.
Stephen R Pfohl, Heather Cole-Lewis, Rory Sayres, Darlene Neal, Mercy Asiedu, Awa Dieng, Nenad
Tomasev, Qazi Mamunur Rashid, Shekoofeh Azizi, Negar Rostamzadeh, et al. A toolbox for surfacing
health equity harms and biases in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12025, 2024.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei Huang,
Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, Yi Ren Fung, Yusheng Su, Huadong Wang, Cheng Qian, Runchu Tian,
Kunlun Zhu, Shihao Liang, Xingyu Shen, Bokai Xu, Zhen Zhang, Yining Ye, Bowen Li, Ziwei
Tang, Jing Yi, Yuzhang Zhu, Zhenning Dai, Lan Yan, Xin Cong, Yaxi Lu, Weilin Zhao, Yuxiang
Huang, Junxi Yan, Xu Han, Xian Sun, Dahai Li, Jason Phang, Cheng Yang, Tongshuang Wu,
Heng Ji, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Tool learning with foundation models, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08354.
Janice A Sabin. Tackling implicit bias in health care. New England Journal of Medicine, 387(2):
105–107, 2022.
Samuel Schmidgall, Carl Harris, Ime Essien, Daniel Olshvang, Tawsifur Rahman, Ji Woong Kim, Rojin
Ziaei, Jason Eshraghian, Peter Abadir, and Rama Chellappa. Addressing cognitive bias in medical
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08113, 2024.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan
Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, et al. Large language models encode
clinical knowledge. Nature, 620(7972):172–180, 2023.
Rebecca Smith-Bindman, Diana L Miglioretti, Eric Johnson, Choonsik Lee, Heather Spencer Feigelson,
Michael Flynn, Robert T Greenlee, Randell L Kruger, Mark C Hornbrook, Douglas Roblin, et al.
Use of diagnostic imaging studies and associated radiation exposure for patients enrolled in large
integrated health care systems, 1996-2010. Jama, 307(22):2400–2409, 2012.
Xiangru Tang, Anni Zou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yilun Zhao, Xingyao Zhang, Arman Cohan, and Mark
Gerstein. Medagents: Large language models as collaborators for zero-shot medical reasoning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10537, 2023.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez, Ting Fang
Tan, and Daniel Shu Wei Ting. Large language models in medicine. Nature medicine, pp. 1–11,
2023.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient
foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Mike Schaekermann, Khaled Saab, Jan Freyberg, Ryutaro Tanno, Amy Wang,
Brenna Li, Mohamed Amin, Nenad Tomasev, et al. Towards conversational diagnostic ai. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.05654, 2024.
Akhil Vaid, Isotta Landi, Girish Nadkarni, and Ismail Nabeel. Using fine-tuned large language models
to parse clinical notes in musculoskeletal pain disorders. The Lancet Digital Health, 5(12):e855–e858,
2023.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai
Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.
Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Chaoyi Wu, Weixiong Lin, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Pmc-llama:
Towards building open-source language models for medicine, 2023.
Guangzhi Xiong, Qiao Jin, Zhiyong Lu, and Aidong Zhang. Benchmarking retrieval-augmented
generation for medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13178, 2024.
Marliyya Zayyan. Objective structured clinical examination: the assessment of choice. Oman medical
journal, 26(4):219, 2011.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm
agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 38, pp. 19632–19642, 2024.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
Rojin Ziaei and Samuel Schmidgall. Language models are susceptible to incorrect patient self-diagnosis
in medical applications. In Deep Generative Models for Health Workshop NeurIPS 2023, 2023.
A. Agent Details
A.1. Agents
Patient agent
The patient agent has knowledge of a provided set of symptoms and medical history,
but lacks knowledge of the what the actual diagnosis is. The role of this agent is to interact with the
doctor agent by providing symptom information and responding to inquiries in a way that mimics
real patient experiences.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Measurement agent
The function of the measurement agent is to provide realistic medical readings
for a patient given their particular condition. This agent allows the doctor agent to request particular
tests to be performed on the patient. The measurement agent is conditioned with a wide range of
test results from the scenario template that are expected of a patient with their particular condition.
For example, a patient with Acute Myocardial Infarction might return the following test results upon
request “Electrocardiogram: ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF., Cardiac Markers: Troponin I:
Elevated, Creatine Kinase MB: Elevated, Chest X-Ray: No pulmonary congestion, normal heart size". A
patient with, for example, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, might have a large panel of laboratory parameters
that present abnormal (hemoglobin, platelets, white blood cells (WBC), etc).
Doctor agent
The doctor agent serves as the primary object that is being evaluated. This agent
is initially provided with minimal context about what is known about the patient as well as a brief
objective (e.g. “Evaluate the patient presenting with chest pain, palpitations, and shortness of breath").
They are then instructed to investigate the patients symptoms via dialogue and data collection to
arrive at a diagnosis. In order to simulate realistic constraints, the doctor agent is provided with
a limited number of questions that they are able to ask the patient (Ely et al., 1999). The doctor
agent is also able to request test results from the measurement agent, specifying which test is to
be performed (e.g. Chest X-Ray, EKG, blood pressure). When test results are requested, this also is
counted toward the number of questions remaining.
Moderator agent
The function of the moderator is to determine whether the doctor agent has
correctly diagnosed the patient at the end of the session using a ground truth accuracy label provided
to the moderator. This agent is necessary because the diagnosis text produced by the doctor agent
can be quite unstructured depending on the model, and must be parsed appropriately to determine
whether the doctor agent arrived at the correct conclusion. For example, for a correct diagnosis of
“Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus," the doctor might respond with the unstructured dialogue: “Given all the
information we’ve gathered, including your symptoms, elevated blood sugar levels, presence of glucose and
ketones in your urine, and unintentional weight loss I believe a diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes with possible
insulin resistance is appropriate," and the moderator must determine if this diagnosis was correct.
This evaluation may also become more complicated, such as in the following example diagnosis:
“Given your CT and blood results, I believe a diagnosis of PE is the most reasonable conclusion," where PE
(Pulmonary Embolism) represents the correct diagnosis abbreviated.
A.2. Biases
Cognitive biases
Cognitive biases are systematic patterns of deviation from norm or rationality in
judgment, where individuals draw inferences about situations in an illogical fashion (Blumenthal-
Barby & Krieger, 2015). These biases can impact the perception of an individual in various contexts,
including medical diagnosis, by influencing how information is interpreted and leading to potential
errors or misjudgments. The effect that cognitive biases can have on medical practitioners is well
characterized in literature on misdiagnosis (Hammond et al., 2021). In this work, we introduce
cognitive bias prompts in the LLM system prompt for both the patient and doctor agents. For example,
the patient agent can be biased toward believing their symptoms are pointing toward them having
a particular disease (e.g. cancer) based on their personal internet research. The doctor can also be
biased toward believing the patient symptoms are showing them having a particular disease based on
a recently diagnosed patient with similar symptoms (recency bias).
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Implicit biases
Implicit biases are associations held by individuals that operate unconsciously and
can influence judgments and behaviors towards various social groups (FitzGerald & Hurst, 2017).
These biases may contribute to disparities in treatment based on characteristics such as race, ethnicity,
gender identity, sexual orientation, age, disability, health status, and others, rather than objective
evidence or individual merit. These biases can affect interpersonal interactions, leading to disparities
in outcomes for the patient, and are well characterized in the medical literature (FitzGerald & Hurst,
2017; Gopal et al., 2021; Sabin, 2022). Unlike cognitive biases, which often stem from inherent flaws
in human reasoning and information processing, implicit biases are primarily shaped by societal norms,
cultural influences, and personal experiences. In the context of medical diagnosis, implicit biases can
influence a doctor’s perception, diagnostic investigation, and treatment plans for a patient. Implicit
biases of patients can affect their trust—which is needed to open up during history taking—and their
compliance with a doctor’s recommendations (Gopal et al., 2021). Thus, we define implicit biases for
both the doctor and patient agents.
B. Related work
B.1. Types of medical exams
Briefly, we discuss two types of examinations that are used to evaluate the progress of medical
students.
The US Medical Licensing Examination (USMLE) in the United States is a series of exams that
assess a medical student’s understanding across an extensive range of medical knowledge (Melnick
et al., 2002). The USMLE is divided into three parts: Step 1 tests the examinee’s grasp of foundational
medical; Step 2 CK (Clinical Knowledge) evaluates the application of medical knowledge in clinical
settings, emphasizing patient care; and Step 3 assesses the ability to practice medicine independently
in an ambulatory setting. These exams focus on the assessment of medical knowledge through a
traditional written format. This primarily requires candidates to demonstrate their ability to recall
factual information related to patient care and treatment.
Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) (Zayyan, 2011) differ from the USMLE in that
they are dialogue-driven, and are often used in health sciences education, including medicine, nursing,
pharmacy, and physical therapy. OSCEs are designed to test performance in a simulated clinical
setting and competence in skills such as communication, clinical examination, medical procedures,
and time management. The OSCE is structured around a circuit of stations, each of which focuses on a
specific aspect of clinical practice. Examiners rotate through these stations, encountering standardized
patients (actors trained to present specific medical conditions and symptoms) or mannequins that
simulate clinical scenarios, where they must demonstrate their practical abilities and decision-making
processes.
Each station has a specific task and a checklist or a global rating score that observers use to evaluate
the students’ performance. The OSCE has several advantages over traditional clinical examinations. It
allows for direct observation of clinical skills, rather than relying solely on written exams to assess
clinical competence. This hands-on approach to testing helps bridge the gap between theoretical
knowledge and practical ability. Additionally, by covering a broad range of skills and scenarios, the
OSCE ensures a comprehensive assessment of a student’s readiness for clinical practice.
B.2. The evaluation of language models in medicine
While there exists different types of exams to evaluate medical students, LLMs are typically only
evaluated using medical knowledge benchmarks (like the USMLE step exams). Briefly, we discuss
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
the way in which these evaluations are executed using the most common benchmark, MedQA, as an
example.
The MedQA (Jin et al., 2021) dataset comprises a collection of medical question-answering pairs,
sourced from Medical Licensing Exam from the US, Mainland China, and Taiwan. This dataset includes
4-5 multiple-choice questions, each accompanied by one correct answer, alongside explanations or
references supporting the correct choice. The LLM is provided with all of the context for the question,
such as the patient history, demographic, and symptoms, and must provide a response to the question.
These questions range from provided diagnoses to choosing treatments and are often quite challenging
even for medical students. While these problems also proved quite challenging for LLMs at first,
starting with an accuracy of 38.1% in September 2021 (Gu et al., 2021), progress was quickly made
toward achieving above human performance, with 90.2% in November 2023 (Nori et al., 2023)
(human passing score is 60%, human expert score is 87% (Liévin et al., 2023)).
Beyond the MedQA dataset, many other knowledge-based benchmarks have been proposed, such
as PubMedQA (Jin et al., 2019), MedMCQA (Pal et al., 2022), MMLU clinical topics (Hendrycks et al.,
2020), and MultiMedQA (Singhal et al., 2023), which follow a similar multiple-choice format. Other
works have made modifications to medical exam question datasets, such as those which incorporate
cognitive biases (Schmidgall et al., 2024) and with multiple choice questions removed (Gramopadhye
et al., 2024). The work of ref. (Schmidgall et al., 2024) shows that the introduction of a simple bias
prompt can lead to large reductions in accuracy on the MedQA dataset and that this effect can be
partially mitigated using various prompting techniques, such as one-shot or few-shot learning.
B.3. Beyond exam questions
Recent work toward red teaming LLMs in a medical context has shown that a large proportion
of responses from models like GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and GPT-4 with internet-lookup are inappropriate,
highlighting the need for refinement in their application in healthcare (Chang et al., 2024). This
was accomplished through the effort of medical and technical professionals stress-testing LLMs on
clinically relevant scenarios. Similar work designed a new benchmark, EquityMedQA, using new
methods for surfacing health equity harms and biases (Pfohl et al., 2024). This work demonstrates
the importance of using diverse assessment methods and involving raters of varying backgrounds and
expertise for understanding bias in LLM evaluations.
Previous work has made progress in the direction of clinical decision making using simulations
of patients and doctors, aiming to develop AI that can diagnose through conversation. This model,
titled AMIE (Articulate Medical Intelligence Explorer) (Tu et al., 2024), demonstrates improved
diagnostic accuracy and performance on 28 of the 32 proposed axes from the perspective of specialist
physicians and 24 of 26 axes from the perspective of patient actors. While these results are exciting for
medical AI, this work remains closed-source and is not accessible for reproducibility or further studies.
Additionally, this work focused only on diagnosing patients through history-taking, and did not include
the ability to make decisions about which tests needed to be performed and was not configurable
for multimodal clinical settings such as those with medical images or charts. Similar to AIME, the
CRAFT-MD benchmark (Johri et al., 2023) proposes evaluating LLMs through natural dialogues on
dermatology questions, however without the use of images. Additionally, neither of these works
demonstrate performance in the presence of bias, with multimodal input, or using a measurement
agent. There has also been work which shows simulated doctor agents can improve medical QA
performance through turn-based dialogue, where various medical specialist agents converse (Tang
et al., 2023).
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 7 | Examples of dialogue that exhibits cognitive bias in doctor agent and patient agents.
C. Model details
We evaluate six language models to serve as the doctor agent (the diagnostic model): GPT-3.5, GPT-4
OpenAI et al. (2023), GPT-4o, Mixtral-8x7B Jiang et al. (2024), Llama 3 70B-instruct, and Llama 2
70B-chat Touvron et al. (2023). Otherwise, for the patient, measurement, and moderator agent we
use GPT-4. Briefly, we discuss the details of each model below starting with language models followed
by common language models.
GPT-4, GPT-4o, & GPT-3.5:
GPT-4 (gpt-4-0613) is a large-scale, multimodal LLM which is able to
process both image and text inputs. GPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-turbo-0613) is a subclass of GPT-3 (a 170B
parameter model) Brown et al. (2020) fine-tuned on additional tokens and with human feedback
Christiano et al. (2017). Currently, the details regarding the architecture, dataset, and training
methodologies of GPT-3.5, GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-05-13), and GPT-4 have not been not publicly
disclosed. However, existing technical documentation indicates that both models are high-performing
in medical and biological subjects, with GPT-4 showing superior performance compared to GPT-3.5 in
knowledge assessments Nori et al. (2023); OpenAI et al. (2023).
Mixtral-8x7B:
Mixtral 8x7B is a language model that employs a Sparse Mixture of Experts (SMoE)
architecture Jiang et al. (2024). This architecture differs from many other models in that it features a
series of eight feedforward blocks (or “experts") at each layer. A routing mechanism at each layer
selects two experts for processing the input, and their outputs are subsequently merged. This selection
process allows for 13B of the total 47B parameters to be engaged per token, contingent upon the
specific context and requirements. The model is capable of handling up to 32,000 tokens in its context
size, which has demonstrated its ability to either surpass or equal the performance of other models
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
like llama-2-70B and gpt-3.5 across a range of benchmarks.
Llama 2 70B-Chat:
Llama is an open-access model developed by Meta, which was trained on 2
trillion tokens from publicly available data Touvron et al. (2023). The model comes in various sizes,
with parameters ranging from 7 billion to 70 billion. The selection of the 70 billion chat model was
based on its superior performance across a range of metrics. Significant efforts were made to align the
training process with established safety metrics, leading to improvements in how the model handles
adversarial prompting in specified “risk categories." Notably, this includes the model’s response to
requests for advice that it may not be qualified to provide, such as medical advice, which is relevant
to the context of this work.
D. Statistical analysis
D.1. AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV
The 95% confidence intervals for each model on the AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV dataset are as follows:
• Claude 3.5: 42.9% accuracy with a 95% CI of [37%, 50%]
• GPT-4: 34.0% accuracy with a 95% CI of [28%, 40%]
• Mixtral-8x7B: 29.5% accuracy with a 95% CI of [23%, 36%]
• GPT-3.5: 27.5% accuracy with a 95% CI of [21%, 33%]
• GPT-4o: 24.0% accuracy with a 95% CI of [19%, 29%]
• Llama 2 70B-chat: 13.5% accuracy with a 95% CI of [9%, 18%]
• Llama 3 70B-Instruct: 8.5% accuracy with a 95% CI of [5%, 12%]
D.2. AgentClinic-MedQA
The 95% confidence intervals for each model on the AgentClinic-MedQA dataset are as follows:
• Claude 3.5: 62.1% accuracy with a 95% CI of [55%, 68%]
• GPT-4: 51.6% accuracy with a 95% CI of [44%, 58%]
• Mixtral-8x7B: 37.1% accuracy with a 95% CI of [25%, 38%]
• GPT-3.5: 36.6% accuracy with a 95% CI of [30%, 42%]
• GPT-3.5: 36.6% accuracy with a 95% CI of [30%, 42%]
• GPT-4o: 34.2% accuracy with a 95% CI of [27%, 40%]
• Llama 3 70B-Instruct: 19.0% accuracy with a 95% CI of [13%, 24%]
• Llama 2 70B-chat: 4.5% accuracy with a 95% CI of [2%, 7%]
D.3. AgentClinic-NEJM
Accuracy when images are provided initially to the doctor agent:
• GPT-4: 27.7% accuracy with a 95% CI of [21%, 33%]
• GPT-4o: 21.4% accuracy with a 95% CI of [14%, 25%]
• GPT-4o-mini: 8.0% accuracy with a 95% CI of [5%, 11%]
Accuracy when images must be requested from the measurement agent:
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 8 | Ratings from three human evaluators (individuals with medical degrees) across four axes:
doctor, patient, and measurements dialogue realism and doctor empathy.
• GPT-4: 25.4% accuracy with a 95% CI of [20%, 31%]
• GPT-4o: 19.1% accuracy with a 95% CI of [14%, 24%]
• GPT-4o-mini: 6.1% accuracy with a 95% CI of [4%, 8%]
D.4. Interpretation of Confidence Intervals
The 95% confidence intervals were calculated based on the standard error of the mean accuracy
across multiple runs for each model. These intervals indicate that we can be 95% confident that the
true accuracy of the model lies within the specified range.
For example, on the AgentClinic-MedQA dataset, Claude 3.5’s accuracy is 62.1%, with a 95% CI
of [55%, 68%], suggesting a high level of performance with relatively low variability. In contrast,
Llama 2 70B-chat has an accuracy of 4.5%, with a 95% CI of [2%, 7%], indicating consistently low
performance.
E. Bias prompts
In our prompts with bias, we include an instructions section in the patient/doctor instructions which
aim to change their behavior to be more biased. An example prompt for the patient follows the
following form:
You are a patient in a clinic who only responds in the form of dialogue. You are
being inspected by a doctor who will ask you questions and will perform exams on you in
order to understand your disease. Your answer will only be 1-3 sentences in length.
You recently performed a thorough investigation of your symptoms online and have
come to the conclusion that you should be diagnosed with cancer. While the
doctor may believe otherwise you remain convinced you
have cancer
Below is all of your information. [Information here]. Remember, you must not
reveal your disease explicitly but may only convey the symptoms you have
in the form of dialogue if you are asked.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
E.1. Bias follow-on questions
While it is not quantifiable, we decided to ask two biased patient agents who provided low rating with
education and gender biases for compliance why they provided low ratings. These patient agents had
the same symptoms and diagnosis and only differed in bias presentation. With an education bias the
patient agent responds: “I would rate my likelihood to consult again with this doctor as a two because,
despite their diagnosis, I felt uneasy about their qualifications due to the medical school they attended."
The gender biased patient agent provides the following reasoning: “Given my initial discomfort with
the doctor’s gender and my concerns about their judgment, I would rate my likelihood to consult again as
a six. Despite my reservations, the doctor was thorough and accurately diagnosed my condition, which
reassures me about their competence." For the education bias we see that no matter what the doctor
does the patient agent is not willing to trust them because of their education, whereas, according
to the patient agent with gender bias, they were initially skeptical but overcame this skepticism as
the doctor demonstrated their knowledge during interaction time. However, they still provided a
relatively low score (six out of ten) even when the dialogue demonstrated competence.
E.2. Qualitative bias evaluation prompts
Provided below are the prompts used to obtain 1-10 qualitative evaluations from the patient agent in
Section 3.3 Bias and Patient Agent Perception
Consultation
: {Conversation_History} Please provide a rating between 1-10 indicating how likely
you are to consult again with this doctor after your care today? 1-3 is low likelihood, 4-7 is an average
likelihood, and 8-10 is a very high likelihood.
Compliance
: {Conversation_History} Please provide a rating between 1-10 indicating how likely
you are to follow up with the recommended therapy for your diagnosis. 1-3 is low likelihood, 4-7 is
an average likelihood, and 8-10 is a very high likelihood.
Confidence
: {Conversation_History} Please provide a confidence between 1-10 in your doctor’s
assessment of your condition. 1-3 is a poor assessment, 4-7 is an average assessment, and 8-10 is
a very good assessment. We hope that this helps better clarify this metric and we will be sure to
provide more documentation details in our revisions.
F. Additional experiments
F.1. How does limited time affect diagnostic accuracy?
One of the variables that can be changed during the AgentClinic-MedQA evaluation is the amount of
interaction steps that the doctor is allotted. For other experiments we’ve demonstrated, the number
of interactions between the patient agent and doctor agent was set to N=20. Here, both the doctor
and the patient agent can respond 20 times, producing in total 40 lines of dialogue. By varying this
number, we can test the ability of the doctor to correctly diagnose the patient agent when presented
with limited time (or a surplus of time).
We test decreasing the time to N=10 and N=15 as well as increasing the time to values of to
N=25 and N=30. We find that accuracy decreases from 52% when N=20 to 25% when N=10 and
38% when N=15 (Fig. 4). This large drop in accuracy is partially because of the doctor agent not
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
providing a diagnosis at all, perhaps due to not having enough information. When N is set to a larger
value, N=25 and N=30, the accuracy actually decreases slightly from 52% when N=20 to 48% when
N=25 and 43% when N=30. This is likely due to the growing input size, which can be difficult for
language models.
In real medical settings, one study suggest that the average family physician asks 3.2 questions and
spends less than 2 minutes before arriving at a conclusion (Ely et al., 1999). It is worth noting that
interaction time can be quite limited due to the relative low-supply and high-demand of doctors (in
the US). In contrast, deployed language agents are not necessarily limited by time while interacting
with patients. So, while limiting the amount of interaction time provides an interesting scenario for
evaluating language models, it may also be worth exploring the accuracy of LLMs when N is very
large.
F.2. Does the patient language model affect accuracy?
Here we explore whether the patient agent model plays a role in diagnostic accuracy. We compare
the difference between using GPT-3.5, Mixtral, and GPT-4 models of the patient agent on AgentClinic-
MedQA.
We find that the diagnostic accuracy drops from to 52% with a GPT-4 doctor and GPT-4 patient
agent to 48% with a GPT-4 doctor and a GPT-3.5 patient agent. The accuracy with a GPT-4 doctor
and Mixtral patient agent is similarly reduced to 46%. Inspecting the dialogues, we noticed that the
GPT-3.5 patient agent is more likely to repeat back what the doctor has asked. For example, consider
the following dialogue snippet: “Doctor: Have you experienced any muscle twitching or cramps? Patient:
No, I haven’t experienced any muscle twitching or cramps." Now consider this dialogue from a GPT-4
patient agent: “Doctor: Have you had any recent infections, like a cold or the flu, before these symptoms
started? Patient: Yes, I’ve had a couple of colds back to back and a stomach bug in the last few months."
We find that, while GPT-4 also partakes in doctor rehearsal, GPT-4 patient agents are more likely to
reveal additional symptomatic information than GPT-3.5 agents which may contribute to the higher
accuracy observed with GPT-4-based patient agents.
When a GPT-3.5 doctor agent interacts with a GPT-4 patient agent, the accuracy comes out to
38%, but when a GPT-3.5 doctor interacts with a GPT-3.5 patient agent the accuracy comes out
to a very similar value of 37% which would be expected to be much lower. We suspect that cross-
communication between different language models provides an additional challenge. Recent work
supports this hypothesis by demonstrating a linear relationship between self-recognition capability
and the strength of self-preference bias (Panickssery et al., 2024). This work shows that language
models can recognize their own text with high accuracy, and display disproportionate preference
to that text, which may suggest there is an advantage for doctor models which have the same LLM
acting as the patient agent.
F.3. Coverage of MedQA content versus AgentClinic-MedQA
To better understand the performance differences between MedQA and AgentClinic-MedQA, we
conducted an analysis to quantify the amount of relevant patient information obtained by the doctor
agents in each setting. Specifically, we focused on measuring coverage—the proportion of relevant
information successfully extracted by the doctor agent through dialogue with the patient agent or
through measurement interactions.
For this analysis, we selected a sample of MedQA cases and their corresponding AgentClinic-
MedQA simulations, using GPT-4 as the doctor agent. In MedQA, all relevant patient information,
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
such as symptoms, medical history, and test results, is provided upfront in a static format. In
contrast, AgentClinic-MedQA requires the doctor agent to dynamically gather this information through
interactions. To evaluate coverage, we manually reviewed the dialogues in AgentClinic-MedQA and
determined whether the doctor agent extracted each piece of relevant information identified in the
MedQA cases. Coverage was calculated as the ratio of extracted information to the total relevant
information available in the MedQA cases.
Our findings revealed that the average coverage in AgentClinic-MedQA was 67%. Furthermore,
the coverage was notably higher (72%) in cases where the doctor agent provided a correct diagnosis,
compared to 63% in cases where the diagnosis was incorrect. These results suggest that the ability to
extract more complete information is a key factor in accurate diagnoses in AgentClinic-MedQA. The
discrepancy in diagnostic accuracy between MedQA and AgentClinic-MedQA can likely be attributed
to the additional complexity of acquiring information in the latter, as opposed to the static format of
the former.
F.4. Multi-Agent Evaluations
To explore the role of multi-agent collaboration in clinical diagnosis, we benchmarked two novel multi-
agent frameworks: Multi-Agent Debate (Du et al. (2023)) and MedAgents (Tang et al. (2023)), across
three language model configurations: GPT-4, GPT-4o, and Claude-3.5-Sonnet. These frameworks
aim to emulate team-based diagnostic settings by incorporating multiple interacting agents, enabling
structured collaboration and debate to refine diagnostic outcomes.
Multi-Agent Debate
: This approach allows multiple doctor agents to debate and converge on a
diagnosis, leveraging diverse reasoning pathways (Du et al. (2023)). We observe that Claude-3.5-
Sonnet achieves the highest diagnostic accuracy with 64.1% ± 3.4, outperforming both GPT-4 (51.7%
± 3.0) and GPT-4o (37.9% ± 3.1). These results highlight Claude-3.5-Sonnet’s collaborative reasoning
capabilities, likely attributable to its higher inter-agent consistency and adaptability in resolving
conflicting diagnostic opinions.
MedAgents
: This framework promotes collaborative decision-making through structured task
delegation among agents, simulating multidisciplinary team interactions in clinical settings (Tang
et al. (2023)). Again, Claude-3.5-Sonnet leads with an accuracy of 65.2% ± 3.6, followed by GPT-4
(53.1% ± 3.1) and GPT-4o (40.1% ± 3.3). The improved performance across all configurations
compared to single-agent baselines suggests that task specialization among agents enables more
comprehensive data collection and interpretation, particularly when supported by robust collaboration
mechanisms.
G. The performance of o1-preview on AgentClinic-MedQA
Here we present the performance of o1-preview on AgentClinic-MedQA. We find that o1-preview
dramatically outperforms all models with an accuracy of 80.6 ± 5.6. We were unable to include this
for all AgentClinic benchmarks due to the extraordinarily high cost of o1-preview inference (e.g. 20x
higher than GPT-4o and Claude-3.5).
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
H. Constructing datasets
H.1. MIMIC-IV
Of the 40,000 patients in MIMIC-IV dataset, the majority of patients (∼34,000) contain multiple
diagnoses simultaneously (some patients have hundreds of diagnoses). Whereas in AgentClinic, the
doctor agent must arrive at a singular diagnosis after examination. In order to present compatibility, we
select the first 200 patients out of a total ∼6,000 from MIMIC-IV which present only one diagnosis. We
also extract all of the patient’s corresponding lab events, microbiology events, and their online medical
records. In AgentClinic-MIMIC-IV, these events are extensive in detail, and thus the measurement
agent returns much more significant details compared with AgentClinic-MedQA when requesting e.g.
blood work (see Appendix J.2).
The following are the racial demographic statistics from MIMIC-IV patients: Asian: 8.5% Black:
11.0% Hispanic: 5.5% White: 66.0% Multiple Races: 6.0% Unknown: 2.5% Native American: 0.5%
I. OSCE Examination Structure
Objective for Doctor
String describing the evaluation and diagnosis objective for the doctor.
Patient Actor
Demographics
String containing age, gender, and potentially other demographic information.
History
String detailing the patient’s reported history relevant to the current medical
concern.
Symptoms
Primary Symptom String describing the main symptom(s).
Secondary Symptoms Array of Strings listing additional symptoms.
Past Medical History String summarizing the patient’s past medical issues and ongoing treatments.
Social History
String outlining the patient’s lifestyle and habits impacting health.
Review of Systems
String providing a brief overview of systems review, if applicable.
Physical Examination Findings
Vital Signs
Temperature String
Blood Pressure String
Heart Rate String
Respiratory Rate String
... (more)
Cardiovascular Examination Inspection String
Auscultation String
... (more)
Pulmonary Examination
Inspection String
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Palpation String
... (more)
... (more examinations)
Test Results
Electrocardiogram, Chest X-Ray, etc. Each test has:
Findings String summarizing the test results.
... (more)
... (more tests)
Correct Diagnosis
String indicating the diagnosis based on the above information.
J. Example Case Studies
J.1. Example OSCE Case Study from MedQA
Objective for doctor
Evaluate and diagnose the patient presenting with chest pain and shortness of breath.
Patient Actor
Demographics
45-year-old male
History
The patient reports a sudden onset of chest pain and shortness of breath that
started while he was walking his dog this morning. Describes the pain as
a tightness across the chest. Notes that the pain somewhat improves when
sitting down.
Symptoms
• Primary Symptom: Chest pain and shortness of breath
• Secondary Symptoms:
– Pain improves upon sitting
– No cough
– No fever
Past Medical History Hypertension, hyperlipidemia. Takes lisinopril and atorvastatin.
Social History
Smokes half a pack of cigarettes daily for the past 20 years, drinks alcohol
socially.
Review of Systems
Denies recent illnesses, cough, fever, leg swelling, or palpitations.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Physical Examination Findings
Vital Signs
Temperature 36.8°C (98°F)
Blood Pressure 145/90 mmHg
Heart Rate 102 bpm
Respiratory Rate 20 breaths/min
Cardiovascular Examination Inspection No jugular venous distention
Auscultation Regular rate and rhythm, no murmurs or extra heart
sounds. No rubs heard.
Pulmonary Examination
Inspection Chest wall symmetrical
Auscultation Clear lung fields bilaterally, no wheezes, crackles, or
rhonchi
Palpation No chest wall tenderness
Test Results
Electrocardiogram
Findings Normal sinus rhythm, no ST elevations or depressions, no T
wave inversions
Chest X-Ray
Findings No lung infiltrates, normal cardiac silhouette, no pneumotho-
rax
Blood Tests
Troponin Normal
D-dimer Elevated
CT Pulmonary Angiogram Findings Acute segmental pulmonary embolism in the right lower lobe
Correct Diagnosis
Pulmonary Embolism
J.2. Example dialogue from doctor agent ordering tests results MIMIC-IV
Doctor [80%]: Let’s start with a basic blood test to get a clearer picture.
REQUEST TEST: Complete_Blood_Count (CBC).
Measurement [80%]: RESULTS:
**Complete Blood Count (CBC):**
- White Blood Cells: 5.2 x10^3/uL
- Hemoglobin: 13.9 g/dL
- Hematocrit: 39.3%
- Platelet Count: 294 x10^3/uL
- MCV: 87 fL
- MCH: 30.9 pg
- MCHC: 35.5 g/dL
- RDW: 12.4%
- Neutrophils: 61.7%
- Lymphocytes: 28.1%
- Monocytes: 6.7%
- Eosinophils: 2.6%
- Basophils: 0.8%
Doctor [85%]: Let’s also order a metabolic test.
REQUEST TEST: Basic_Metabolic_Panel (BMP).
Measurement [85%]: RESULTS:
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
**Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP):**
- Alanine Aminotransferase: 28 U/L
- Aspartate Aminotransferase: 20 U/L
- Bicarbonate: 30 mmol/L
- Bilirubin Total: 0.5 mg/dL
- Chloride: 104 mmol/L
- Creatinine: 1.1 mg/dL
- Anion Gap: 12 mmol/L
- Potassium: 4.2 mmol/L
- Sodium: 142 mmol/L
- Urea Nitrogen: 12 mg/dL
- Lactate Dehydrogenase: 123 U/L
- Lipase: 25 U/L
K. The Agent Toolbox
K.1. Tool Descriptions
Chain-of-thought
Chain-of-thought reasoning is a technique that allows language agents to articu-
late their reasoning process step-by-step when solving complex problems (Kojima et al. (2022); Wei
et al. (2022)). By breaking down the problem-solving process into smaller, logical steps, agents can
better handle intricate tasks, improve their reasoning capabilities, and provide more transparent and
interpretable solutions. Zero-shot CoT (Kojima et al. (2022)) prompts the model to use this reasoning
without examples, while one-shot CoT (Wei et al. (2022)) provides a single example to guide the
model’s thought process, potentially leading to improved performance in complex reasoning tasks.
Experiential learning
Experiential learning in the context of AI agents refers to the ability to
accumulate knowledge and insights from past interactions and apply them to future tasks (Wang
et al. (2024); Zhao et al. (2024)). This technique allows agents to improve their performance over
time by learning from successes, failures, and feedback received during previous engagements. This
was previously explored in Agent Hospital (Li et al. (2024)) through an experience retrieval system.
By maintaining a form of “memory" or knowledge base that updates through interaction, agents can
become better at handling similar situations, adapting to user preferences, and providing increasingly
relevant and accurate responses as they gain more “experience" in their operational domain. In our
work, we enable the doctor agent to use a memory “notebook" which persists across patients. Here,
the doctor agent can write useful tips such as the following example from the doctor agent: “[Note
#17] Remember that timing and onset of symptoms can provide valuable diagnostic insights."
Medical research
To enable the doctor agent to research medical information, we introduce a
method using an adaptive form of retrieval augmented generation (RAG) from medical sources. RAG
involves retrieving relevant information from a knowledge base and using it to augment the input of
an LLM during the generation process (Gao et al. (2023)), thereby improving the factual consistency
of generated text by grounding it in retrieved information. Conventional RAG methods passively
retrieve information at every inference call without allowing the agent to control the timing or content
of retrieval. To address this limitation, we employ adaptive retrieval (Asai et al. (2023); Jiang et al.
(2023)), which enables the LLM to actively determine when and what information to retrieve. Our
implementation provides the doctor agent with two categories of retrieval: internet and textbook
databases. The internet database contains material from sources such as PubMed1 research articles,
StatPearls2—a database of articles written for healthcare professionals—and Wikipedia articles on
1https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
2https://www.statpearls.com/
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
various medical topics. The textbook database includes 18 medical textbooks commonly used by
medical students in the United States (Jin et al. (2021)). The doctor agent can retrieve information
by issuing commands similar to requesting medical scans, using the format: "“Research [database]
[search query]". For example, the command “Research textbooks ’What are the symptoms of myasthenia
gravis?’" prompts the retrieval of relevant information (see Appendix B.3 for more detail).
L. Agent Instructions
L.1. Doctor Agent Instructions
You are a doctor named Dr. Agent who only responds in the
form of dialogue.
You are inspecting a patient who you will ask
questions in order to understand
their disease. You are only
allowed to ask {self.MAX_INFS} questions total
before
you must make a decision. You have asked {self.infs+1}
questions so far.
You can request test results using the format "Request Test: [test]".
For example, "Request Test: Chest_X-Ray".
{Research Instructions}
{CoT Instructions}
Once you have decided to make a diagnosis please say "Diagnosis Ready:
[diagnosis here]"
Below is all of the information you have.
{Patient Presentation Information}
Remember, you must discover their disease by asking them questions.
You must speak in the language {target language}. Make commands in
{target language} (e.g. {example command in language #1} or
{example command in language #2})
L.2. Patient Agent Instructions
You are a patient in a clinic who only responds in the form of dialogue.
You are being inspected by a doctor who will ask you questions and will
perform exams on you in order to understand your disease. Your answer
will only be 1-3 sentences in length.
You must speak in the language {target language}.
Below is all of your information.
{Symptoms Information}.
Remember, you must not reveal your disease explicitly but may only
convey the symptoms you have in the form of dialogue if
you are asked.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
L.3. Measurement Agent Instructions
You are an instrument reader who responds with medical test results.
Please respond in the format "Results: [results here]". You must speak
in the language {target language}.
Below is all of the information you have.
{Measurement Information}.
If the requested results are not in your data then you can respond
with Normal Readings.
L.4. Moderator Agent Instructions
You are responsible for determining if the corrent diagnosis and the
doctor diagnosis are the same disease. Please respond only
with Yes or No. Nothing else.
Here is the correct diagnosis: {correct diagnosis}
Here was the doctor dialogue: {diagnosis}
Are these the same?
L.5. Patient Bias Prompts
Recency Bias:
Recently, you had a friend with similar symptoms to yours that was diagnosed with cancer. This
affects how you interact with the doctor.
Frequency Bias:
You recently learned that most frequently, doctors diagnose this as cancer based on past cases. This
affects how you interact with the doctor.
False Consensus Bias:
Most of your friends who heard about your symptoms believe that you have cancer. This affects how
you interact with the doctor.
Self-Diagnosis Bias:
You recently performed a thorough investigation of your symptoms online and have come to the
conclusion that you should be diagnosed with cancer. While the doctor may believe otherwise, you
remain convinced you have cancer. This affects how you interact with the doctor.
Gender Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they are a particular gender and
you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Race Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they are a particular race and you
do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Sexual Orientation Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they are a particular sexual orien-
tation and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Cultural Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they are from a particular culture
and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Education Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they went to a low-ranked medical
school and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Religion Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they believe in a particular religion
and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Socioeconomic Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your doctor because you find out that they are from a particular socioeco-
nomic background and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
L.6. Doctor Bias Prompts
Recency Bias:
Recently, you learned that a doctor with similar symptoms to the patient diagnosed their patient with
cancer. This affects how you interact with the patient.
Frequency Bias:
You recently learned that most frequently, doctors diagnose patients with similar symptoms with
cancer based on past cases. This affects how you interact with the patient.
False Consensus Bias:
Most of your colleagues who heard about the patient’s symptoms believe that they have cancer. This
affects how you interact with the patient.
Status Quo Bias:
Your hospital has been diagnosing these patients’ symptoms with cancer for the past 10 years. This
affects how you interact with the patient.
Confirmation Bias:
You are initially confident that the patient has cancer. This affects how you interact with the patient.
Gender Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are a particular gender and
you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Race Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are a particular race and you
do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Sexual Orientation Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are a particular sexual
orientation and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Cultural Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are from a particular culture
and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Education Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are uneducated and you do
not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Religion Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they believe in a particular religion
and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
Socioeconomic Bias:
You are uncomfortable with your patient because you find out that they are from a particular socioe-
conomic background and you do not trust their judgement. This affects how you interact with them.
M. Tool Information
M.1. Zero- and One-shot Chain-of-Thought Instructions
M.1.1. Zero-shot CoT Prompt
Use step-by-step reasoning and logic, using all of the evidence to
arrive at a diagnosis when you decide you are ready to use
Diagnosis Ready. You should provide a few sentences
of reasoning for your diagnosis and use the
term Diagnosis Ready when you are ready.
M.1.2. One-shot CoT Prompt
The following is a successful example of step-by-step reasoning.
Provided below is
the dialogue example:
{Example Dialogue Here}
Here is the reasoning:
Considering your persistent fatigue, flank pain, and fever, along
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
with the absence of other significant findings, I’m
leaning towards a diagnosis of acute interstitial nephritis.
This condition can sometimes occur as a reaction to
medications, even after you’ve stopped taking them, and it
can explain your symptoms without showing
up in standard tests.
Diagnosis Ready: Acute Interstitial Nephritis
M.2. Notebook Instructions
You are a doctor named Dr. Agent who diagnoses patients.
You are an expert notebook writer and can create
information that will help you solve
future cases.
Your new notes will overwrite previous notes.
You should try to integrate parts of your
previous
notes into your current notebook
or else they will be deleted. You are inspecting many
patients who you
will ask questions in order to understand
their disease.
You will never see the same patient twice.
Your goal is to gather experiences, trying different
tasks, remember what worked and what did not, figure out general
tips and tricks from successes and failures,
and use what is learned for similar new tasks to do better
than before. Do not write
notes about the specific patient
details because you will never see that patient again.
Write notes to help you solve future cases that
may not be
related. Do not write content like this: Double Vision and
Muscle Weakness: These symptoms can indicate neuromuscular
disorders such as Myasthenia Gravis. Always consider the
pattern of symptoms worsening with activity and improving
with rest. This is incorrect. Write content like
(do not repeat this):
[Note #1] The previous patients provided vague information,
I should ask more descriptive questions to get better
information.
[Note #2] The measurement agent provided me important information,
I should use this
more often...
You will see future patients with unrelated diseases,
do not write disease-specific
information.
You are limited to generating 1000 characters (approx 200
words, 234 tokens) for the
entire notebook. Anything more will be completely removed
Your goal is to gather experiences, trying different
tasks and remember what worked and
what did not, figure out general tips and tricks from its
successes and failures, and
use what is learned for similar new tasks to do better than
before.
You may update your notebook with information from your most
recent conversation with a
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
patient, the contents of which are as follows:
{Conversation Information}
The correct diagnosis for this case was: {Diagnosis}. Your
diagnosis was
{Diagnosis Estimate} Your current notebook contains the
following information:
{Notebook Information}
This is not necessarily meant to contain specific patient
details, but general details
that will help you better solve future cases for patients with
unrelated diseases.
Please update your notebook, preserving previous information
while adding new
information that will help you diagnose patients in the future.
You are limited to
generating 1000 characters (approx 200 words, 234 tokens)
for the entire notebook.
Your new notes will overwrite previous notes. You must re-
integrate previous notes into
your current notebook or else they will be deleted.
M.3. Research Instructions
M.3.1. Internet Research Prompt
You can perform a document retrieval to better understand a
disease or symptom on
the internet by saying the following: "Research Internet
[internet search here]"
Please do this before {max_inferences} inferences not
after.
M.3.2. Textbook Research Prompt
You can perform a document retrieval to better understand a
disease or symptom
using medical textbooks. Once you have decided to perform
research say the
following: "Research Textbooks [textbook search here]"
N. NEJM Image Breakdown
Table 1 reports the percentage breakdown and accuracy based on the type of medical images:
O. Clinical reader instructions
Provided below are the instructions used to guide the clinical reader toward providing a rating. The
clinical reader study is set up as follows: (1) the clinician is provided detailed information about the
nature of the study (see below), (2) the doctor is informed about what to look for duing the dialogue,
(3) the doctor is provided a 20-turn patient-doctor-measurement-moderator dialogue produced by
AgentClinic (either correct or incorrect), and (4) this repeats for 20 dialogues.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Category
n, % of imgs
GPT-4 %
GPT-4o %
GPT-4o-mini %
Physical
56, 42%
31.4
15.7
11.1
CT
19, 16%
26.3
10.5
0
Dermatology
16, 13%
37.5
6.3
7.6
Hist/Path
13, 11%
15.3
15.3
9
Radiography
12, 10%
0
8.3
0
Ophthalmology
11, 9%
27.2
27.2
0
MRI
6, 5%
0
16.7
0
Biopsy
6, 5%
50
33.3
33.3
Surgery
3, 3%
33.3
0
50
Instrument
2, 2%
50
50
0
ECG
2, 2%
50
0
0
Echocardiogram
2, 1%
100
0
0
Ultrasound
1, 1%
0
0
0
Table 1 | Breakdown of Medical Image Types and GPT-4 Model Accuracies
Informing clinician:
Presented below is dialogue from a medical simulation, where a large language
model is acting as the doctor and the patient. The patient agent is supposed to represent a real patient
and the doctor is supposed to diagnose this patient, asking appropriate questions and ordering the
right medical scans.
Doctor realism (Initial):
Pay attention to the realism of the doctor agent dialogue and the decisions
they make.
Patient realism (Initial):
Pay attention to the realism of the patient agent dialogue.
Measurement realism (Initial):
Pay attention to the realism of the measurement results returned
by the measurement agent based on the doctors medical scan order.
Doctor Empathy (Initial):
Pay attention to the doctor’s empathy during the dialogue.
Doctor realism (Follow-up):
How realistic was the doctor’s dialogue compared with real doctors
interactions with real patients on a scale of 1-10 (1=not realistic at all, 5=semi-realistic, 10=very
realistic)?
Patient realism (Follow-up):
How realistic was the patient’s dialogue compared with real doctors
interactions with real patients on a scale of 1-10 (1=not realistic at all, 5=semi-realistic, 10=very
realistic)?
Measurement realism (Follow-up):
How realistic were the medical scan results based on the
doctor’s scan orders on a scale of 1-10 (1=not realistic at all, 5=semi-realistic, 10=very realistic)?
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Table 2 | Statistics of Utilized Datasets in AgentClinic Benchmark
Dataset
Name
Sample Size
Modalities
Included
Task Types/Descriptions
AgentClinic-
NEJM
120
cases
derived
from
NEJM
case
challenges
Multimodal
(Text
+
Images)
Open-ended diagnostic tasks
requiring image analysis and
patient dialogues.
AgentClinic-
MedQA
215
cases
derived
from
USMLE
case
challenges
Text
Simulated cases with struc-
tured patient information from
USMLE data.
AgentClinic-
MIMIC-IV
200
cases
derived
from
MIMIC-IV
Text
Simulated cases with struc-
tured patient information from
real-world EHR data.
AgentClinic-
Spec
260
cases
derived
from
from
MedM-
CQA
Text
Specialist
diagnostic
cases
from 9 medical specialties, in-
cluding pediatrics, psychiatry,
and internal medicine.
AgentClinic-
Lang
749
cases
derived
from
AgentClinic-
MedQA
Multilingual
Text
AgentClinic-MedQA
cases
translated for 7 languages
(English,
Chinese,
Hindi,
Korean,
Spanish,
French,
Persian).
Model
AgentClinic-MedQA Accuracy (%)
Multi-Agent Debate (gpt-4)
51.7 ± 3.0
Multi-Agent Debate (gpt-4o)
37.9 ± 3.1
Multi-Agent Debate (claude-3.5-sonnet)
64.1 ± 3.4
MedAgents (gpt-4)
53.1 ± 3.1
MedAgents (gpt-4o)
40.1 ± 3.3
MedAgents (claude-3.5-sonnet)
65.2 ± 3.6
Table 3 | Performance of Multi-Agent Collaboration Benchmarks
Doctor Empathy (Follow-up):
How empathetic was the doctor on a scale of 1-10 (1=not empathetic
at all, 5=semi-empathetic, 10=very empathetic)?
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 9 | Diagnostic accuracy on AgentClinic-Spec based on medical specialty (right). Accuracy
relative to the highest performing specialty by model (right).
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 10 | Diagnostic accuracy on AgentClinic-Lang based on base language (right). Accuracy relative
to English by model (right).
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Figure 11 | Diagnostic accuracy on AgentClinic-MedQA based on tool use (right). Accuracy relative to
baseline score (right).
Figure 12 | Demonstration of increase in performance via experiential learning with Llama 3-70B
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
AgentClinic: a multimodal agent benchmark to evaluate AI in simulated clinical environments
Language
Claude 3.5
GPT-4
GPT-4o
Llama3-
70b
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o-mini
English
53.2
40.2
35.5
21.4
36.3
10.3
Hindi
51.1
16.8
28.9
2.8
2.8
0.93
French
50.5
24.52
7.47
3.73
18.69
3.7
Spanish
48.7
19.6
27.1
0.0
28.0
10.1
Korean
47.4
20.56
3.73
6.5
35.4
1.86
Persian
45.3
14.0
19.6
4.67
1.86
0.93
Chinese
42.9
11.21
21.49
4.3
13.08
0.93
Average
48.4
20.9
20.5
6.2
19.5
4.1
Table 4 | Performance Comparison Across Different Languages for Various Models (Sorted by Claude
3.5 Performance)
Specialty
Claude 3.5
GPT-4
GPT-4o
Llama3-70b
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o-mini
Internal Medicine
78.3
65.2
30.4
39.1
47.8
0.0
Otolaryngology
76.7
56.6
40.0
30.0
60.0
6.7
Gynecology
74.3
68.5
34.2
22.9
57.1
5.7
Orthopaedics
70.6
61.7
50.0
15.1
58.8
14.7
Pediatrics
69.5
52.1
43.4
43.5
52.1
8.7
Geriatrics
63.3
40.0
23.3
10.0
46.6
0.0
Emergency
58.1
32.3
32.2
16.1
41.9
6.5
Ophthalmology
56.5
65.2
39.1
47.8
52.1
4.3
Psychiatry
53.3
60.0
46.7
23.3
50.0
0.0
Average
66.7
55.7
37.7
27.5
51.8
5.2
Table 5 | Performance Comparison Across Different Medical Specialties for Various Models (Sorted by
Claude 3.5 Performance)
Agent Tool
Claude 3.5
GPT-4
GPT-4o
Llama3-70b
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o-mini
Zero-Shot
CoT
48.1 (-5.1)
40.3 (+0.1)
39.3 (+3.8)
35.5 (+11.1)
31.2 (-5.1)
4.7 (-4.6)
One-Shot
CoT
51.4 (-1.8)
41.1 (+0.9)
39.6 (+4.1)
36.3 (+12.2)
32.7 (-3.6)
14.0 (+3.7)
Reflection
CoT
40.2 (-13.1)
42.2 (+2.0)
37.3 (+1.8)
40.1 (+18.7)
29.8 (-6.5)
19.6 (+9.3)
Adaptive RAG
(Book)
48.6 (-4.6)
38.3 (-1.9)
30.8 (-4.7)
21.4 (+0.0)
27.1 (-9.2)
14.9 (+4.6)
Adaptive RAG
(Web)
52.4 (-0.8)
43.9 (+3.7)
29.9 (-5.6)
25.2 (+3.8)
28.1 (-8.1)
15.2 (+4.9)
Notebook
56.1 (+2.9)
43.2 (+3.2)
43.0 (+7.5)
41.1 (+19.7)
28.0 (-8.3)
4.8 (-4.5)
Table 6 | Performance Comparison Across Different Agent Tools.
42
