
===== PAGE 1 =====
Predicting Spatial Transcriptomics from H&E Image by 
Pretrained Contrastive Alignment Learning 
Jiawei Zou1,8*, Kai Xiao1,8*, Zexi Chen1,8, Jiazheng Pei1,8, Jing Xu1,8, Tao Chen2, 
Likun Hou3, Chunyan Wu3, Yunlang She2#, Zhiyuan Yuan4,5#, Luonan 
Chen1,6,7# 
 
1, State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell 
Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; 
2, Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China; 
3, Department of Pathology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Tongji University, Shanghai, 200433, China; 
4, Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence; MOE 
Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence; 
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; 
5, Center for Medical Research and Innovation, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, 
Fudan University Pudong Medical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
6, School of Mathematical Sciences and School of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai 200240, China; 
7, Key Laboratory of Systems Health Science of Zhejiang Province, School of 
Life Science, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou 310024, China; 
8, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 
 
 
*These authors contributed equally to this work 
#Corresponding authors: 
Luonan Chen: lnchen@sjtu.edu.cn 
Zhiyuan Yuan: zhiyuan@fudan.edu.cn 
Yunlang She: langthoracic@tongji.edu.cn  
 
 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
Abstract  
The intricate molecular landscape within tissues holds crucial information 
about cellular behavior and disease progression, yet capturing this complexity 
at a spatial level remains challenging. While Spatial transcriptomics (ST) offers 
valuable insights into gene expression patterns within their native tissue 
context, its widespread adoption is hindered by high costs and limited gene 
detection capabilities. Here we introduce CarHE (Contrastive Alignment of 
gene expRession for hematoxylin and eosin image), a method that overcomes 
these limitations by accurately predicting high-dimensional ST data (over 
10,000 genes) solely from readily available H&E (Hematoxylin and Eosin) 
stained images. This novel pre-trained architecture employs contrastive 
learning through two mechanisms: cell-type-based transcriptomics information 
transfer and image-based histology information transfer. These mechanisms 
precisely align image features with spatial single-cell gene expressions, 
achieving prediction accuracies exceeding 0.7 (up to 1.7 folds compared to 
second best) across diverse tissue types and species. CarHE’s superior 
performance extends to identifying subtle pathological features such as tertiary 
lymphoid structures in various cancers, including breast cancer, lung cancer, 
melanoma and ccRCC (clear cell renal cell carcinoma), and reconstructing 3D 
spatial transcriptomics from images alone, offering a cost-effective and robust 
alternative for large-scale spatial transcriptomics. We further validated 
CarHE’s effectiveness by predicting DFS (Disease-Free Survival) from >1,600 
lung cancer patients HE images, achieving a significantly higher AUC (Area 
Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve) of 0.73 compared to 
state-of-the-art alternatives (0.58-0.64). 
 
Introduction 
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) has revolutionized our understanding of tissue 
biology by enabling the quantification of gene expression within its native 
spatial context, providing crucial insights into tissue development, disease 
progression, and three-dimensional organ architecture1,2. Despite its potential, 
current ST technologies, including imaging-based methods (e.g., Xenium3,4, 
MERFISH5,6, seqFISH7-9, STARmap10) and sequencing-based methods (e.g., 
10x Visium11, Visium HD11, stereo-seq12), are constrained by cost, spatial 
resolution and/or gene coverage. Even advanced platforms like the Xenium, 
while offering single-cell resolution, remain cost-prohibitive and gene-limited.  
 
The 
growing 
availability 
of large-scale spatial 
transcriptomics (ST) 
datasets—many with paired H&E images—has spurred computational 
methods to predict gene expression directly from histology. While methods like 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 3 =====
HisToGene13, Hist2ST14, ENLIGHT-DeepPT15, His2ST14 and BLEEP16 have 
emerged, they face fundamental challenges. The histology-to-expression 
relationship is inherently complex, and image features alone prove insufficient 
for comprehensive gene prediction. Critically, existing methods predict only a 
limited subset of genes (typically < 10,00). iSTAR17 and STEM18 leverages 
pre-trained H&E vision-transformer models to improve prediction accuracy. It 
further lack cross-tissue generalizability, that is, models trained on one tissue 
type exhibit significant performance degradation when applied to others. 
 
These limitations are notable because pathologists readily identify major cell 
types from H&E images19,20, and cell types share common gene expression 
patterns across different tissues. Recent advancements in foundation models 
(e.g., scGPT21, scFoundation22, GMAI23 and Prov-GigaPath24) have provided 
powerful tools for feature extraction from both gene expression data and H&E 
images, providing an opportunity to address these limitations and develop a 
more comprehensive gene expression prediction solution. 
 
Here, we present CarHE (Contrastive Alignment of gene expRession for H&E 
image), a pre-trained deep learning architecture that accurately and robustly 
predicts spatial transcriptomics profiles solely from H&E image across various 
tissue types. CarHE employs a two-step approach: first, a CLIP (Contrastive 
Language-Image Pre-Training)25 contrastive learning model aligns H&E image 
patches with cell type features, enabling reliable transfer of high-dimensional 
transcriptomics information through cell type associations. Second, an 
alignment refinement scheme using gradCAM26,27 maps image patches to 
single-cell features, facilitating precise spatial and histology information 
transfer. This approach enables comprehensive prediction of extensive gene 
expression profiles (over 17,000 genes) from H&E alone—surpassing gene 
coverage of current SOTA methods by >17-fold. 
 
We first validated CarHE's performance using the HER2ST (BRCA)28 and 
melanoma Xenium datasets, achieving prediction accuracies PCC (Pearson 
correlation coefficient) exceeding 0.7-0.8 and significantly outperforming 
existing methods by up to 2 folds across diverse tissue types and species. The 
model demonstrated utility in identifying tertiary lymphoid structures (TLS) in 
BRCA and ccRCC29 samples, detecting subtle features that pathologists might 
overlook. Furthermore, CarHE successfully reconstructed three-dimensional 
gene expression patterns from H&E images of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal 
Cortex (DLPFCdataset30, generating spatial structures that align well with 
established knowledge. To demonstrate cross-species applicability, we trained 
CarHE on mouse intestine 10X Visium HD data, achieving cell-type 
localization with an AUROC exceeding 0.9. The clinical relevance of CarHE 
was further validated using treatment outcome data from over 1,600 lung 
cancer patients. CarHE identified TLS precisely on these H&E slides and 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 4 =====
predicted DFS based on H&E images and imputed ST data with significant 
higher accuracy of 0.73 than exiting methods (0.58-0.64).  
 
Results 
 
The overview of CarHE 
 
We constructed a comprehensive pretraining dataset comprising over 2 million 
cells or spots, each enriched with its spatial context, to facilitate downstream 
representation learning. To ensure broad generalizability across various 
sequencing technologies, the dataset integrates spatial transcriptomics data 
from four distinct assay platforms: Visium, Visium HD, ST (Spatial 
Transcriptomics), Xenium and Merfish (Figure 1A). This diverse corpus 
includes data spanning more than 10 human organs and tissues, originating 
from over 100 unique spatial slides derived from cancer samples, all 
accompanied by paired H&E-stained histology images. scGPT was applied to 
effectively learn a shared embedding space that harmonizes information 
across 
diverse 
sequencing 
protocols, 
bridging 
the 
gap 
between 
sequencing-based and imaging-based modalities. To facilitate downstream 
analysis, the embeddings of all cells and spots were clustered into 100 distinct 
clusters, which we refer to as "cell clusters." 
 
CarHE employs a novel two-step contrastive learning framework (Figure 1 B, 
C) that integrate both single-cell transcriptomics information and image-based 
spatial information to achieve comprehensive spatial transcriptomics 
prediction.   
 
The H&E images were first segmented into image patches according to the 
location of spots or cells. That is, a patch k,    is an extended region centered 
around a spot or a cell with the size 256x256 pixels, about 0.5 μm/pixel. In the 
first step (cell-type-based RNA-seq information transfer), a Hierarchical Image 
Pyramid Transformer (HIPT) 31,32 model, pre-trained via self-supervised 
learning (SSL) on publicly available hematoxylin-and-eosin (H&E)-stained 
histology image datasets, is employed. HIPT extracts multi-scale image 
features (Qk) at two resolutions: 16x16 pixels (capturing fine-grained tissue 
characteristics) and 256x256 pixels (capturing broader structural features of 
the tissue) as one patch (taking patch-k as an example). Furthermore, the 
image features are reduced to image embedding features (Pk) by a projection 
network. Simultaneously, gene expression features or RNA features (sCk) are 
extracted from the gene expression   for cell k, using a pre-trained 
single-cell foundation model (scGPT), specifically designed for RNA-seq data. 
For each spot or cell, the resulting embeddings are matched into one cell 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 5 =====
cluster Sm, and the average feature of each cluster is used as its 
representation. Further, the cell cluster features are reduced to cell embedding 
features (Cm). These gene expression embedding features (Cm) of clusters are 
then aligned with H&E image embedding features (Pk) via a modified 
contrastive learning approach inspired by CLIP25, which leverages a 
feed-forward neural network for projection (Figure 1A), i.e. obtaining the matrix 
W0 between cell clusters and image patches. W0 actually corresponds to the 
matrix between cell clusters and spots/cells, which is used as an initial matrix 
in the following second step, noting that each patch is centered on one spot. 
Training the model across diverse tissue datasets enables the transfer of 
RNA-seq-derived information from cell clusters to the corresponding cells in 
H&E images.  
 
In the second step (image-based spatial information transfer), a circulating 
alignment model is developed to refine the spatial localization of cell clusters. 
For a given query image, cell clusters gene expression embedding features 
(Cm) obtained in the pre-training data serve as a reference. Initial matrix or 
weights W0, representing the correspondence between cell clusters and the 
query image patch, are computed for the original H&E image. These weights 
Wt are iteratively (t   t+1) refined through recalculations based on 
edge-masked images generated using Grad-CAM26,27, progressively excluding 
unreliable matches. This iterative optimization results in the retention of only 
reliably matched cell clusters and their precise spatial locations, i.e. the 
converged matrix or weights W (Figure 1B). Thus, we obtain accurate 
reconstruction of spatial transcriptomics at a single spot or cell level from 
H&E-stained images alone by (  ,  ∑
,    ,


). 
 
Clearly, CarHE adopts two mechanisms: cell-type-based transcriptomics 
information transfer and image-based spatial information transfer. Through this 
dual-step approach, CarHE successfully bridges the gap between histological 
features and gene expression patterns, enabling accurate reconstruction of 
spatial transcriptomics data comprising over 10,000 genes from H&E-stained 
images alone. 
 
Importantly, the pretraining strategy endows CarHE with robust gene 
expression prediction capabilities across diverse tissue types, while 
addressing the challenge of limited gene numbers. For any given H&E-stained 
histological image, CarHE enables accurate gene expression inference and 
precise cell type classification. Building upon these predictions, the model 
facilitates a range of advanced downstream applications, including 3D tissue 
reconstruction, identification of fine-grained biological structures, and survival 
outcome prediction. This comprehensive framework effectively integrates 
histological and genomic data, providing powerful tools for both exploratory 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 6 =====
and predictive tasks in spatial biology (Figure 1 D). 
 
 
 
Benchmarking of CarHE on BRCA ST Data and Melanoma Xenium Data 
 
To benchmark CarHE's accuracy in predicting spot-level gene expression, we 
validated the model performances on BRCA spatial transcriptomics (ST) data28, 
and melanoma Xenium data. The BRCA ST data from patient 1 and the 
melanoma Xenium data were removed from the training datasets. We 
predicted the gene expression from the H&E image of these two datasets 
using pre-trained CarHE, HisToGene, HisToST, THItoGene33 and STEM18, and 
compared the results with the ground truth. Since some of the methods were 
unable to predict large number of genes, we showed the results of top 3 genes 
i.e. CD3D, CD74 and COL3A1 (Figure 2 A). The prediction results of CarHE 
were consistent with manual annotations, demonstrating strong concordance 
between CarHE predictions and ground truth spatial distributions. To 
quantitatively assess performance, we calculated the Pearson correlation 
coefficient (PCC) between predicted and ground truth gene expression. The 
PCC results of CarHE prediction for the 3 genes were 0.64, 0.68 and 0.57, 
which were 1.5 folds higher than other methods. The overall PCC of top 
variable genes (300, 500, 1,000, 2,000) of CarHE prediction were 0.68, 0.70, 
0.68 and 0.60, which were also significant higher than other methods (p value 
< 0.0001) (Figure 2. B). We also applied CarHE on an melanoma Xenium 
dataset. The prediction of cell type labels of CarHE were highly consistent with 
the ground truth, and the ARI (Adjusted Random Index) was 0.77. The detailed 
cell type prediction near the tumor border showed that CarHE could clearly 
identify the the CAFs (cancer associated fibroblasts) near tumor cells and T 
cells. Similar results were observed for ccRCC data prediction by CarHE (PCC 
= 0.65 for >17,000 genes; Supplementary Figure 1). The detailed benchmark 
results can be viewed in Table 1. 
 
 
CarHE identifies robust functional TLS area on cancer H&E images 
 
To evaluate CarHE's performance in identifying tertiary lymphoid structures 
(TLSs), we leveraged annotations from the original publication's BRCA 
dataset29,34.  Pathologists annotated TLSs (also known as ectopic lymphoid 
aggregates), important prognostic markers in cancer immunology, within the 
H&E images using color-coding (yellow for immune infiltrates; Figure 3A, E).  
Following the iSTAR method, TLS scores were calculated for patient F and H 
using the expression of known marker genes (i.e. CD3D, CD4, CD8A, CD79A; 
Supplementary Table 1).  Figures 3B and 3C (patient 1) and Figures 3F and 
3G (patient 2) show the TLS scores for both ground truth and CarHE 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 7 =====
predictions, exhibiting PCCs of 0.75 and 0.82, respectively. Comparison of 
high-scoring regions revealed strong concordance between CarHE predictions 
and manual annotations for patient 1 (Figure 3 B, C), except for one area 
initially annotated as cancer (Figure 3D).  However, upon closer inspection 
(yellow dashed lines in Figure 3D), this area displayed immune infiltration 
features. In patient 2, CarHE predictions accurately identified both manually 
annotated immune infiltrated areas (Figure 3. F, G).  Although two small 
cancerous regions showed high ground truth TLS scores in the second area 
(Figure 3H), CarHE's lower scores in these regions better reflected the H&E 
image features characteristic of cancerous tissue. This suggests that high TLS 
gene expression in these ground truth spots might reflect signal bleed-through 
from neighboring immune cells.  Overall, these results demonstrate that 
CarHE accurately predicts TLS features consistent with both ground truth 
annotations and H&E image characteristics. 
 
CarHE constructs 3D structure of DLPFC solely by H&E images 
 
To evaluate CarHE's capability in reconstructing complex 3D tissue 
architecture solely from H&E images, we analyzed the DLPFC dataset30, 
focusing on four consecutive tissue sections (151673, 151674, 151675, and 
151676; Figure 4A-E).  While the predicted gene expression patterns showed 
moderate correlation with ground truth measurements (Pearson correlation 
coefficient (PCC) =0.32; Supplementary Figure 2), this lower correlation 
comparison to cancer datasets likely reflects the HViT model's initial 
pre-training bias toward TCGA cancer specimens rather than normal tissues. 
 
Despite this limitation, simple k-means clustering (k=7) of the predicted gene 
expression profiles revealed spatial patterns that closely matched expert 
manual annotations of cortical layers (Figure 4A-E). The three-dimensional 
reconstruction using Stitch3D further validated these findings, demonstrating 
clear preservation of the laminar organization characteristic of cortical 
architecture (Figure 4F). 
 
To understand the developmental implications of this spatial organization, we 
performed trajectory analysis using UMAP dimensionality reduction coupled 
with PAGA (Figure 4G-J). The resulting trajectory map revealed a clear 
progression from layer 1 through layer 6 and into the white matter (WM), 
accurately reflecting the established developmental sequence of cortical layer 
formation. 
 
CarHE predicts precise cell type distribution on mouse dataset 
 
CarHE was also applied to a mouse intestinal 10x Visium HD dataset, where 
gene expression was measured in 2x2 µm patches. Initially, StarDist35,36 was 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 8 =====
used for cell segmentation, generating a single-cell resolution spatial 
transcriptomics (ST) dataset. CarHE was trained on the right half of the 
dataset (coordinates > 50,00 µm), with the left half used for testing. Due to the 
dataset-specific training, the number of cell clusters was reduced to 21, 
corresponding to the number of clusters identified using the Leiden algorithm 
(resolution = 1). Predicted and ground truth cluster classifications are shown in 
Figure 5 A, B. Focusing on marker genes for enterocytes, goblet cells, Paneth 
cells, and T cells, we compared the predicted and ground truth spatial 
distributions of these cell types (Figure 5C). The area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUROC) exceeded 0.9 for all cell clusters 
(clusters). Given the functional divergence between intestinal villi and glands, 
we further analyzed the spatial distribution of Lyz1, a marker gene primarily 
expressed in the glands. As shown in Figure 5D, E, both predicted and ground 
truth Lyz1 expression were predominantly localized to the gland region, with 
minimal expression in the villi, highlighting CarHE's robust performance across 
diverse tissue types and data modalities. 
 
CarHE identifies TLS precisely on lung H&E slides and predict accurate 
DFS for patients 
 
As an application of CarHE, we evaluated its performance on over 1,600 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained lung cancer slides obtained from 881 
patients (in-house dataset). Spatial transcriptomics (ST) data were imputed at 
the spot-level across these slides, capturing the cellular composition and TLS 
(tertiary lymphoid structure) scores. Among the cohort, cancer regions and 
TLS areas in 62 slides were manually annotated by pathologists. To assess 
the accuracy of CarHE, we first compared regions with high TLS scores (spots 
exhibiting statistically significant TLS scores above the median of other spots) 
predicted by CarHE with manual annotations (Figure 6A, B). The results 
demonstrated strong concordance, as the predicted TLS regions (marked by 
blue rectangles) closely aligned with the manually annotated TLS areas 
(highlighted by green circles).  
 
Additionally, we analyzed the primary cell type distributions in these regions 
and presented the findings in Figure 6C. Consistent with expectations, the 
cancer areas were predominantly identified as cancer cells, whereas the TLS 
regions were primarily imputed as immune cell populations, including B cells, T 
cells, and macrophages. The correspondence between cell types inferred by 
CarHE and the three manually annotated categories demonstrated high 
concordance, with correct annotations exceeding 93%, 95%, and 98% for the 
respective categories (Figure 6D).   
 
Finally, we trained a simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model to predict 
disease-free survival (DFS) for patients. This model utilized both image patch 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 9 =====
features and the inferred gene expression features generated by CarHE. On 
the validation cohort, the MLP model achieved an area under the curve (AUC) 
of 0.734, substantially outperforming state-of-the-art methods, which reported 
AUCs of 0.586 and 0.643, respectively. This represents a 15% improvement in 
predictive performance relative to existing approaches. 
 
Discussion 
In this study, we introduced CarHE, a pre-trained deep learning framework 
designed to predict high-dimensional spatial transcriptomics (ST) data solely 
from H&E-stained images. The method leverages a two-step contrastive 
learning approach to align histology image features with cell-type-resolved 
gene expressions. The first step establishes connections between image 
patches and cell type features using a CLIP-based contrastive learning model, 
while the second step refines these mappings with gradCAM to ensure precise 
spatial and histological information alignment. This innovative framework 
effectively addresses key limitations in spatial transcriptomics, enabling 
predictions of gene expression patterns across diverse tissue types and 
species with exceptionally high accuracy. 
 
CarHE offers several distinct advantages. First, it significantly reduces costs 
and expands accessibility by eliminating the need for expensive and complex 
ST technologies. Second, it achieves high predictive accuracy (>0.83 Pearson 
correlation coefficient), outperforming existing methods by up to two-fold and 
extending predictions to over 17,000 genes. Third, the model demonstrates 
impressive generalizability across tissues and species, as evidenced by its 
performance with datasets from human cancers, mouse intestine, and the 
human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex dataset (DLPFC). Moreover, it provides 
critical insights into subtle pathological features, such as tertiary lymphoid 
structures (TLS), and reconstructs complex three-dimensional transcriptomic 
profiles from images alone. In a practical application, CarHE outperformed 
other approaches in predicting disease-free survival (DFS) from >1,600 lung 
cancer patient H&E images, achieving a significantly higher AUC of 0.73 
compared to traditional methods.  
 
Despite the promising outcomes, several limitations remain and warrant further 
investigation. First, the predictive performance relies on the quality of input 
H&E images and ST data, with robustness to low-quality datasets still needing 
improvement. Second, while the method generalizes across various tissue 
types, its performance across rare or underrepresented tissue types requires 
further validation. By training on larger amount of data, the robustness of 
CarHE could be improved in future. 
 
In conclusion, CarHE represents a groundbreaking advancement in integrating 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 10 =====
spatial transcriptomics and histological image-based gene expression 
prediction. It addresses significant cost and scalability challenges while 
providing accurate and robust predictions across diverse biological and clinical 
scenarios. Continued research should focus on improving robustness, refining 
cross-tissue generalizability, and optimizing computational efficiency to unlock 
its full potential for widespread adoption. 
 
Methods 
Preprocessing of scRNA and images 
 
H&E image preprocess 
 
Before training, the H&E images were first normalized with staintools, using 
“LuminosityStandardizer” to eliminate the difference between the stains of 
different tissue slides. Then the H&E images were segmented into image 
patches according to the location of spots or cells. The size of each patch is 
256x256 pixels, with about 0.5 µm/pixel. 
 
Gene expression preprocess 
 
To eliminate the batch effect between gene expression of different datasets 
and technologies, we first merged all datasets together with scanpy. After 
quality control, whereas spots or cells with less than 100 genes or transcripts 
expressed were filtered. Then, the top variable genes were detected by 
“scanpy.pp.highly_variable_genes” and used later in scGPT. 
 
scGPT 
 
The single-cell foundation model scGPT is used for RNA feature extraction, 
whereas the pre-trained model on 33 million human cells is applied. The input 
for the scGPT model is the matrix gene expression of each cell which contains 
up 
to 
10,000 
highly 
variable 
genes 
detected 
by 
“scanpy.pp.highly_variable_genes”. The output of the cell embedings is the 
512-dimention RNA features for each cell. 
 
HIPT 
 
We apply HIPT model to extract image features for each 256x256 image 
patches. The HIPT model first applied a VIT model (n=8,h=6,d=384) to extract 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 11 =====
feature at 16 pixel level. The output is the 384-dimention features of each 16 
pixel mini-patch within the 256x256 image patch. Then these features were 
input into another VIT model (n=4,h=6,d=192) to get the 256x256 patch level 
features. The HIPT model was pre-trained on TCGA H&E slides. Here, we 
fine-tuned it with our training datasets derived various cancer slides, by 
training the last two transformer block while keep the others frozen.  
 
Projection network 
 
The projection network is a neural network module. It receives an input 
embedding of dimension (384 for image, 512 for gene expression).  The 
network then projects this input to a projected feature with 256 dimensions 
using a linear layer. This is followed by a GELU non-linearity and another linear 
layer that maintains the 256 dimensions.  Dropout is applied for regularization. 
A key feature is the residual connection, which adds the output of the initial 
linear projection (the 256 dimensions output) to the result after the second 
linear layer and dropout. Finally, layer normalization is applied, again operating 
on the 256 dimensions features. The module's output is a tensor of dimension 
256. This architecture, effectively an MLP with a residual connection and layer 
normalization, aims to create a representation space where distances between 
these 256-sized embeddings are more meaningful for the contrastive loss 
function, thus facilitating effective unsupervised feature learning.  
 
CarHE (Contrastive Alignment of gene expRession for hematoxylin and 
eosin image) 
 
Step-1: cell-type-based RNA-seq information transfer 
 
In the first step of CarHE (cell-type-based RNA-seq information transfer), 
contrastive learning is employed to model the correspondence between 
histological H&E image features and cell-type-specific gene expression 
features.  
After preprocess of datasets, the model is trained with paired H&E images and 
corresponding gene expression data, yielding feature vectors for each modality. 
For H&E image patch  ,     ，we also have the paired gene 
expression  for cell k,    	.  
For H&E patch   , the HIPT model is utilized to extract features at both local 
(16x16 pixels) and global (256x256 pixels) scales, leveraging self-supervised 
learning pre-trained on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset.  
  = HIPT (  ),    
 
Later, the projection network projected the   to a lower dimension of 256. 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 12 =====
	  = Projection1 ( ), 	    
 
For gene expression profiling  , the scGPT foundation model, pre-trained on 
large-scale single-cell RNA-seq datasets, is applied to encode gene 
expression embeddings.  

  = scGPT ( ), 
    
 
These embeddings 
 , derived from scGPT across samples, are grouped 
into a predefined number (m) of cell clusters (default = 100) using 
K-nearest-neighbors clustering. Each spot's or cell's individual gene 
expression embedding is subsequently replaced with the mean embedding of 
the cell cluster to which it belongs, providing a simplified and biologically 
relevant representation.  
 =
∑ 
 

, j  
 ,    
 
Later, another projection network projected the  to a lower dimension of 256. 
 = Projection2 (),    
 
A pairwise weight is then established between H&E image features and 
semi-cell-type gene expression embeddings, aligning them through a modified 
contrastive learning paradigm. This alignment facilitates the transfer of 
transcriptomic information to histological contexts, representing the first step of 
cross-modality integration in the framework. The model is trained with paired 
H&E images and corresponding gene expression data, yielding feature vectors 
for each modality. The contrastive loss is： 
   

	 ,	 /	  
,/	/! 
 
where，
	 , 	   	 	 ； 	 is a symmetric matrix with diagonal elements of 
1 and a constant value " elsewhere，" # 1；! is a learnable temperature 
hyperparameter. 
The final contrastive loss is： 
%  &
	 , ,  
,	 ,  
where， 

 &'( is a cross-entropy loss. 
By these procedures, we can get a weight ) , between any image patch    
and cell cluster . 
 
Step-2: image-based spatial information transfer 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 13 =====
The second step employs an iterative scheme for gene expression prediction 
and spatial mapping of those expressions within the H&E image. Given a 
target H&E image, denoted by patch q, and a set of candidate cell clusters , 
an iterative process is initiated. First, initial matching weights )between the 
target H&E image q and each cell clusters   are computed using the 
trained CarHE in step 1. Each gene expression is treated as a class, and Class 
Activation Maps (CAMs) are generated using Grad-CAM to identify potential 
spatial regions. These initial CAM proposals are often noisy; they can be 
enhanced visually prompted images, through the application of visual cues of 
black edges to highlight identified regions. These visually enhanced images 
are then used to compute refined matching weights ). Any gene expression 
category with a matching probability below a threshold of 0.4 is discarded. This 
refinement process is iteratively repeated, with subsequent visual cues and 
matching probability recalculations, until the predicted set of gene expressions 
and their spatial distributions within the image reach convergence () 
 )). The converged output ), reflects the final gene expression prediction 
and spatial distribution within the H&E image. And the predicted gene 
expression + for patch q can be write as: 
+,  , ), - +,


 
Where ),is the weight of cluster j for patch q, +, is the average gene 
expression of gene i in cluster j. 
 
Algorithm image-based spatial information transfer.  
Require: Image patches Image_patch q, Cell clusters C, Threshold / 0.4. 
Ensure: Predicted RNA-seq +,. 
1: t / 0,) / initialize weight matrix, C / ?, , , … , A 
2: repeat 
3:   for each   ?, , , … , A: 
4:     Compute Grad-CAM activation map for Image_patch with respect to  . 
5:     Mask Image_patch q to highlight regions associated with  . 
6:     Update weight matrix ) based on masked image patches. 
7:   for each Wq, m  ): 
8:     if Wq, m<threshold: 
9:        Drop Wq,m, set Wq, m=0, and remove   from C. 
10:  for each gene i: 
11:       ,  ∑
,    ,


. 
12:  if )=) and C remains unchanged: 
13:     Converged / True. 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 14 =====
14:  else: t / t  1. 
15: until Converged. 
16: return   ,, the predicted RNA-seq for image patches.  
 
Baseline methods 
 
HisToGene13 adopted a ViT as the image encoder, leveraging the self-attention 
mechanism to extract global features, which were subsequently projected onto 
the gene expression space through fully connected layers. 
 
His2ST14 integrated a Convmixer module to capture local 2D visual patterns, a 
Transformer module to model global spatial dependencies via self-attention, 
and a GNN module to explicitly learn neighborhood relationships between 
spots. 
 
THItoGene33 used dynamic convolutional and capsule networks to extract 
molecular-relevant signals from H&E-stained histological images. 
 
Stem18 applied a conditional diffusion model that utilizes DiT blocks and 
pathology foundation models to iteratively generate gene expression profiles 
conditioned on image patches from H&E-stained slides. 
 
Datasets 
 
The pre-training data includes spatial transcriptomics data from four distinct 
assay platforms: Visium, Visium HD, ST (Spatial Transcriptomics), and Xenium. 
The Visium datasets includes one DLPFC dataset30 and one ccRCC dataset29. 
The DLPFC dataset (https://github.com/LieberInstitute/spatialDLPFC) contains 
12 slides, and slides 151673, 151674, 151675, 151676 are kept for testing. 
The ccRCC dataset contains 23 slides, whereas slides c2, c3 and c4 are kept 
for testing. The Visium HD dataset were derived from multiple cancers, 
including lung cancer, colorectal cancer, kidney cancer and pancreas cancer. 
These 
datasets 
are 
collected 
from 
10 
x 
genomics 
website 
(https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets). The ST datasets refers to the BRCA 
dataset (https://github.com/almaan/her2st), which contains 36 slides, the test 
slide is slide H1. The Xenium datasets contains various cancer slides, i.e. lung 
cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer and tonsil dataset. The melanoma dataset 
is kept for testing. These datasets are collected from 10 x genomics 
(https://www.10xgenomics.com/datasets). The WSI dataset of 880 lung cancer 
patients was sourced from four medical centers in China: Shanghai Pulmonary 
Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Ningbo HuaMei 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 15 =====
Hospital, and The First Hospital of Lanzhou University. 
 
Code availability 
 
The CarHE algorithm was implemented in Python and is available on GitHub 
at https://github.com/Jwzouchenlab/CarHE. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of Chen laboratory for technical assistance. This 
work has been supported by National Key R&D Program of China 
(2022YFA1004800, 2025YFF1207900), Natural Science Foundation of China 
(T2341007, T2350003, 12131020, 42450084, 42450135, 12326614, and 
12426310), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality 
(23JS1401300), Zhejiang Province Vanguard Goose-Leading Initiative 
(2025C01114), 
Hangzhou 
Institute 
for 
advanced 
study 
of 
UCAS 
(2024HIAS-P004), and JST Moonshot R&D (JPMJMS2021).  
 
Conflict of interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Authors’ contribution 
Jiawei Zou developed the algorithm and drafted the manuscript. Kai Xiao 
performed benchmarking of the methods and developed the code. Zexi Chen, 
Jiazheng Pei, and Jing Xu contributed to discussions and provided insights 
that enhanced the development of the method. Tao Chen processed the 
in-house data and contributed to the improvement of the manuscript. Likun 
Hou and Chunyan Wu annotated the in-house slides. Yunlang She managed 
the in-house data and contributed to manuscript writing. Zhiyuan Yuan refined 
the method, enhanced the figures, and co-authored the manuscript. Luonan 
Chen supervised the project, designed the algorithm, and provided substantial 
contributions to manuscript writing. 
Reference 
 
1. 
Williams, C.G., Lee, H.J., Asatsuma, T., Vento-Tormo, R. & Haque, A. An 
introduction to spatial transcriptomics for biomedical research. Genome Med 14, 
68 (2022). 
2. 
Moses, L. & Pachter, L. Museum of spatial transcriptomics. Nat Methods 19, 
534-546 (2022). 
3. 
Janesick, A., et al. High resolution mapping of the tumor microenvironment 
using integrated single-cell, spatial and in situ analysis. Nat Commun 14, 8353 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 16 =====
(2023). 
4. 
Hermes, A., et al. 1386 Characterization of tumor heterogeneity and the tumor 
microenvironment in human cancer tissues using the 5K xenium prime in situ 
platform.  (BMJ Specialist Journals, 2024). 
5. 
Moffitt, J.R., et al. Molecular, spatial, and functional single-cell profiling of the 
hypothalamic preoptic region. Science 362(2018). 
6. 
Chen, K.H., Boettiger, A.N., Moffitt, J.R., Wang, S. & Zhuang, X. RNA 
imaging. Spatially resolved, highly multiplexed RNA profiling in single cells. 
Science 348, aaa6090 (2015). 
7. 
Lubeck, E., Coskun, A.F., Zhiyentayev, T., Ahmad, M. & Cai, L. Single-cell in 
situ RNA profiling by sequential hybridization. Nat Methods 11, 360-361 
(2014). 
8. 
Shah, S., Lubeck, E., Zhou, W. & Cai, L. In Situ Transcription Profiling of 
Single Cells Reveals Spatial Organization of Cells in the Mouse Hippocampus. 
Neuron 92, 342-357 (2016). 
9. 
Eng, C.L., et al. Transcriptome-scale super-resolved imaging in tissues by RNA 
seqFISH. Nature 568, 235-239 (2019). 
10. 
Wang, X., et al. Three-dimensional intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell 
transcriptional states. Science 361(2018). 
11. 
10x Genomics.  (2025). 
12. 
Chen, A., et al. Spatiotemporal transcriptomic atlas of mouse organogenesis 
using DNA nanoball-patterned arrays. Cell 185, 1777-1792 e1721 (2022). 
13. 
Pang, M., Su, K. & Li, M. Leveraging information in spatial transcriptomics to 
predict super-resolution gene expression from histology images in tumors. 
bioRxiv, 2021.2011.2028.470212 (2021). 
14. 
Zeng, Y., et al. Spatial transcriptomics prediction from histology jointly through 
Transformer and graph neural networks. Brief Bioinform 23(2022). 
15. 
Hoang, D.T., et al. A deep-learning framework to predict cancer treatment 
response from histopathology images through imputed transcriptomics. Nat 
Cancer 5, 1305-1317 (2024). 
16. 
Xie, R., et al. Spatially resolved gene expression prediction from histology 
images via bi-modal contrastive learning. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 36, 70626-70637 (2023). 
17. 
Zhang, D., et al. Inferring super-resolution tissue architecture by integrating 
spatial transcriptomics with histology. Nat Biotechnol 42, 1372-1377 (2024). 
18. 
Zhu, S., Zhu, Y., Tao, M. & Qiu, P. Diffusion Generative Modeling for Spatially 
Resolved Gene Expression Inference from Histology Images. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2501.15598 (2025). 
19. 
Gao, R., et al. Harnessing TME depicted by histological images to improve 
cancer prognosis through a deep learning system. Cell Rep Med 5, 101536 
(2024). 
20. 
Wu, Y., et al. STASCAN deciphers fine-resolution cell distribution maps in 
spatial transcriptomics by deep learning. Genome Biol 25, 278 (2024). 
21. 
Cui, H., et al. scGPT: toward building a foundation model for single-cell 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 17 =====
multi-omics using generative AI. Nat Methods 21, 1470-1480 (2024). 
22. 
Hao, M., et al. Large-scale foundation model on single-cell transcriptomics. Nat 
Methods 21, 1481-1491 (2024). 
23. 
Moor, M., et al. Foundation models for generalist medical artificial intelligence. 
Nature 616, 259-265 (2023). 
24. 
Xu, H., et al. A whole-slide foundation model for digital pathology from 
real-world data. Nature 630, 181-188 (2024). 
25. 
Alec Radford, J.W.K., Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini 
Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen 
Krueger, Ilya Sutskever. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural 
Language Supervision. Computer Science (2021). 
26. 
Yuqi Lin, M.C., Wenxiao Wang, Boxi Wu, Ke Li, Binbin Lin, Haifeng Liu, and 
Xiaofei He. Clip is also an efficient segmenter: A text-driven approach for 
weakly supervised semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2023). 
27. 
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, M.C., Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi 
Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks 
via gradient-based localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE in- ternational 
conference on computer vision (2017). 
28. 
Andersson, A., et al. Spatial deconvolution of HER2-positive breast cancer 
delineates tumor-associated cell type interactions. Nat Commun 12, 6012 
(2021). 
29. 
Meylan, M., et al. Tertiary lymphoid structures generate and propagate 
anti-tumor antibody-producing plasma cells in renal cell cancer. Immunity 55, 
527-541 e525 (2022). 
30. 
Maynard, K.R., et al. Transcriptome-scale spatial gene expression in the human 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 24, 425-436 (2021). 
31. 
Alexey Dosovitskiy, L.B., Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua 
Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg 
Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 
16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. arXiv (2020). 
32. 
Richard J. Chen, C.C., Yicong Li, Tiffany Y. Chen, Andrew D. Trister, Rahul G. 
Krishnan, Faisal Mahmood. Scaling Vision Transformers to Gigapixel Images 
via Hierarchical Self-Supervised Learning. CVPR (2022). 
33. 
Jia, Y., Liu, J., Chen, L., Zhao, T. & Wang, Y. THItoGene: a deep learning 
method for predicting spatial transcriptomics from histological images. Brief 
Bioinform 25(2023). 
34. 
Schumacher, T.N. & Thommen, D.S. Tertiary lymphoid structures in cancer. 
Science 375, eabf9419 (2022). 
35. 
Myers, U.S.a.M.W.a.C.B.a.G. Cell Detection with Star-Convex Polygons. 
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention 265--273 
(2018). 
36. 
Schmidt, M.W.a.U. Nuclei Instance Segmentation and Classification in 
Histopathology Images with Stardist. The IEEE International Symposium on 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 18 =====
Biomedical Imaging Challenges (ISBIC) (2022). 
 
 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 19 =====
Legends 
 
Figure 1. The overview of CarHE. A. The pretraining data of CarHE. B. The cell 
type based RNA information transfer of CarHE, leveraging HIPT and scGPT to 
extract features from H&E image and RNA-seq expression. The RNA-seq 
features are clustered as cell clusters and further aligned to paired H&E image 
after projection. The model results the weight W representing the match weight 
between image patches and cell clusters. C. The image-based spatial 
information transfer of to query H&E image patch q, the spatial location of each 
cell cluster represented RNA-seq is decided by an iterative refinement of 
weight W, based on marked image by grad-CAM. D. The downstream tasks of 
CarHE. 
 
Figure 2. Benchmarking of CarHE on BRCA ST Data and Melanoma Xenium 
Data. A. Visualization of gene expression levels for CD3D, CD74, and 
COL3A1 overlaid on the H&E-stained image from a BRCA sample (patient 1). 
Results are illustrated for the ground truth and the predictions from four 
methods: CarHE, HisToGene, HisToST, THItoGene and STEM. B. Overall 
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) between predicted gene expression 
and ground truth across different methods. Results are separately shown for 
the top 300, 500, 1,000, and 2,000 most variable genes, highlighting CarHE's 
performance relative to other approaches. C. Cell type annotations for the 
melanoma Xenium dataset, including a magnified view of detailed cell type 
distributions near the tumor border (highlighted within a yellow rectangle). D. 
Predicted cell type annotations for the melanoma Xenium dataset generated 
by CarHE, showcasing both the global cell type landscape and detailed 
predictions near the tumor border (yellow rectangle). 
 
Figure 3 The TLS areas identified by CarHE prediction. A. The manual 
annotation of H&E slide of patient 1, whereas yellow refers to immune 
infiltrated area; red refers to cancer area; light-blue refers to adipose area; blue 
refers to connective area. B. The TLS score calculated by CarHE prediction of 
patient 1, whereas red rectangle represents three areas that might be TLS. C. 
The TLS score calculated based on the ground truth. D. The detailed manual 
annotation of the three TLS areas predicted by CarHE. E. The manual 
annotation of H&E slide of patient 2. F. The TLS score calculated by CarHE 
prediction of patient 2. G. The TLS score calculated based on the ground 
truth.H. Red rectangle represents the detailed manual annotation of the TLS 
area. Below are the detailed TLS score predicted by CarHE and the ground 
truth of, whereas red circle represents a cancer area. 
 
Figure 4. The application of CarHE on human DLPFC dataset. A. the ground 
truth of the structure layers of DLPFC ST dataset. B-E the k-means cluster 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 20 =====
based on CarHE prediction only by H&E images, from slide 151673 to 151676. 
F. the 3D structure of CarHE prediction. G. The slice distribution on umap by 
CarHE prediction. H. The umap cluster. I. The manual layer annotation on 
umap. J. The trajectory reference using PAGA, by CarHE prediction. 
 
Figure 5 The prediction of the mouse intestine visium HD dataset. A. The 
distribution of predicted cell clusters by CarHE. B. The distribution of cell 
clusters of the ground truth. C. The distribution of four main cell types. D. The 
AUROC of prediction of cell clusters. D. The cell cluster distribution and gene 
expression of Roi 1 of ground truth and prediction locate in the villi area. E. The 
cell cluster distribution and gene expression of Roi 1 of ground truth and 
prediction locate in the gland area. 
 
Figure 6. Application of CarHE on in-house lung cancer datasets. 
A Manual annotation of H&E slides by pathologists. Red circles delineate 
overall tissue contours; yellow circles represent cancer areas; green circles 
denote TLS (tertiary lymphoid structure) areas. B Automated TLS annotation 
performed by CarHE. Blue rectangles indicate TLS regions identified by 
CarHE, showcasing alignment with manual annotations. C Distribution of cell 
types predicted by CarHE across annotated areas. Purple spots represent 
stromal cells as identified by CarHE; yellow spots indicate cancer cells; blue 
spots correspond to immune cells, including B cells, T cells, and macrophages. 
D Heatmap illustrating the accuracy of CarHE cell type predictions within the 
three manually annotated categories (cancer areas, stromal regions, and TLS 
regions). High concordance levels were observed between CarHE predictions 
and manual annotations. E CarHE's performance in predicting disease-free 
survival (DFS) for the validation patient cohort. The model integrates features 
derived from image patches and predicted gene expression, yielding robust 
predictive performance. 
 
Supplementary Figure 1. The prediction of ST by CarHE on ccRCC H&E 
images. 
 
Supplementary Figure 2. The prediction of ST on human DLPFC slides. A-D. 
The ground truth expression of top 4 variable genes of ground truth. E-H. The 
gene expression of CarHE prediction. 
 
Table 1. Benchmark of CarHE and other methods on ST data. 
 
Supplementary Table 1. The genes used to identify TLS. 
 
 
.
CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license
available under a
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint
this version posted June 19, 2025. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.06.15.659438
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 21 =====

===== PAGE 22 =====

===== PAGE 23 =====

===== PAGE 24 =====

===== PAGE 25 =====

===== PAGE 26 =====
