
===== PAGE 1 =====
Merlin: A Computed Tomography Vision-Language
Foundation Model and Dataset
Louis Blankemeier*1,2,3†
Ashwin Kumar∗2,3
Joseph Paul Cohen2,‡
Jiaming Liu2,3
Longchao Liu11
Dave Van Veen1,2,3
Syed Jamal Safdar Gardezi4
Hongkun Yu5
Magdalini Paschali2,3
Zhihong
Chen2,3
Jean-Benoit Delbrouck2,3
Eduardo Reis2,3
Robbie Holland2,3
Cesar Truyts5
Christian
Bluethgen2,6
Yufu Wu12
Long Lian13
Malte Engmann Kjeldskov Jensen2,3
Sophie Ostmeier2,3
Maya Varma2,3,7
Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu2,3,7
Zhongnan Fang2,3
Zepeng Huo8
Zaid Nabulsi‡,
Diego Ardila‡, Wei-Hung Weng‡
Edson Amaro Junior5
Neera Ahuja9
Jason Fries7,8
Nigam H.
Shah2,9
Greg Zaharchuk2,3
Marc Willis3
Adam Yala11
Andrew Johnston3
Robert D. Boutin3
Andrew Wentland4
Curtis P. Langlotz2,3,8
Jason Hom9
Sergios Gatidis5
Akshay S. Chaudhari2,3,8,10
1Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
2Stanford Center for Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Imaging, Stanford University
3Department of Radiology, Stanford University
4Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
5Department of Radiology, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein
6Department of Radiology, University Hospital Zurich
7Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
8Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University
9Department of Medicine, Stanford University
10Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University
11Computational Precision Health, University of California Berkeley
12Department of Medical Imaging and Intervention, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou
13Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California Berkeley
Abstract
Over 85 million computed tomography (CT) scans are performed annually in the US, of which
approximately one quarter focus on the abdomen. Given the current shortage of both general
and specialized radiologists, there is a large impetus to use artificial intelligence to alleviate the
burden of interpreting these complex imaging studies while simultaneously using the images
to extract novel physiological insights. Prior state-of-the-art approaches for automated medical
image interpretation leverage vision language models (VLMs) that utilize both the image and the
corresponding textual radiology reports. However, current medical VLMs are generally limited to
2D images and short reports. To overcome these shortcomings for abdominal CT interpretation,
we introduce Merlin - a 3D VLM that leverages both structured electronic health records (EHR)
and unstructured radiology reports for pretraining without requiring additional manual annotations.
We train Merlin using a high-quality clinical dataset of paired CT scans (6+ million images from
15,331 CTs), EHR diagnosis codes (1.8+ million codes), and radiology reports (6+ million tokens)
for training. We comprehensively evaluate Merlin on 6 task types and 752 individual tasks,
covering a variety of diagnostic, prognostic, and quality-related tasks. The non-adapted (off-the-
shelf) tasks include zero-shot findings classification (31 findings), phenotype classification (692
phenotypes), and zero-shot cross-modal retrieval (image to findings and image to impressions),
while model adapted tasks include 5-year chronic disease prediction (6 diseases), radiology report
generation, and 3D semantic segmentation (20 organs). We perform internal validation on a test
set of 5,137 CTs, and external validation on 44,098 CTs from three external sites spanning both
abdomen and chest anatomies, and on two public CT datasets (VerSe, TotalSegmentator). Beyond
*Co-First Authors.
Corresponding author: akshaysc@stanford.edu
1
arXiv:2406.06512v2  [cs.CV]  4 Mar 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
these clinically-relevant evaluations, we assess the efficacy of various network architectures
and training strategies to depict that Merlin has favorable performance to existing task-specific
baselines. We derive data scaling laws to empirically assess training data needs for requisite
downstream task performance. Our resource-friendly approach enables health systems to train
their own foundation models with modest computational resources. We also release our trained
models, code, and dataset, available at: https://github.com/StanfordMIMI/Merlin.
1
Main
Over 85 million computed tomography (CT) scans are performed per year in the US,1,2,3 with approximately
300 million CTs performed globally.4 Amongst these studies, CTs of the abdomen represent approximately one
fourth of all examinations performed.5 These abdominal CT scans can consist of upwards of 300 slices per series
with numerous anatomical structures that need to be examined, leading to time-consuming interpretation, often
requiring 20 minutes per exam.6 Moreover, recent literature suggests that abdominal CT scans contain biomarkers
of early diseases that routinely go unreported.7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 With the current volume of medical imaging and a
6% annual15 increase in medical imaging utilization, the burden on radiologists is significant. Nonetheless, over the
past decades, the number of radiology residency positions in the US has remained relatively constant at 1011 in
2006 and 1113 in 2020.16 This is despite 1,800+ open radiologist positions on the American College of Radiology
job board17 from a pool of roughly 32,000 total active radiologists in the US18*. With the supply of new radiologists
remaining relatively constant and an ever increasing utilization of medical imaging, the radiologist shortage is
projected to expand to over 19,000 by 2036.19,20,21,22
Machine learning (ML) has shown promise in various medical imaging tasks,23,24,25,26 inspiring optimism about
its potential to offset the increasing burden faced by radiologists.19,27 As of May 2024, of the 882 FDA-cleared
ML-enabled devices, 671 (76%) relate to radiology.28 Despite this large prevalence, the current status-quo of
training ML algorithms entails using unimodal (imaging-only) algorithms and retraining for new tasks from scratch
using supervised ML with manually curated labels, even if it may be for the same modality or anatomy. In the
medical imaging scenario, generating such labels requires expensive clinical expert time, limiting the development
of capable AI models for a wide array of tasks.
Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements in vision-language models (VLMs), a data-efficient alter-
native to supervised training. The contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) technique 29 demonstrated the
efficacy of aligning text and visual representations in a shared embedding space as a means of supervising vision
models with natural language. This paradigm enables leveraging internet-scale images and captions, demonstrating
impressive image understanding capabilities in off-the-shelf (zero shot) settings or in settings that use subsequent
adaptation (few shot learning)30 for a large number of downstream tasks. Such models, trained on large-scale
multi-modal pretraining datasets and enabling adaptation for multiple downstream tasks, are commonly referred to
as foundation models.
CLIP-based methods could be readily applied in the clinical setting by training with medical images and corre-
sponding radiology reports that are generated routinely during clinical care, adding no additional data labeling
cost. Many institutions, including ours, de-identify this data to maintain patient privacy while providing a unique
setting for research on this high-quality human-annotated data. Recent ethical viewpoints describe how large-scale
already-acquired clinical data could be responsibly used for secondary purposes such as training ML algorithms, to
ensure that the data are used for the benefit of future patients and society31. Following such frameworks, VLMs like
MedCLIP,32 BiomedCLIP,33 LLaVA-Med,34 Med-Flamingo,35 Med-PaLM M,36 RadFM,37 XrayGPT,38 ELIXR,39
RoentGen,40,41 CheXagent,42 and MAIRA-143 demonstrate the potential of VLMs applied within the radiology
domain.
Despite the burgeoning popularity of VLMs for radiology, most existing models focus on 2D modalities such as
radiographs, notwithstanding that most medical imaging studies are 3D in nature†. Many approaches extend 2D
models to 3D by aggregating predictions slice-by-slice or in chunks of slices across the 2D image stacks that make
up the 3D volume44,45 - an inefficient technique to parse the full 3D imaging volume. Unlike analysis of video,
where successive frames have high correlation, there is limited 3D correlation in volumetric anatomical structures
that rapidly change in all dimensions. This scenario is well-suited for 3D modeling where features spanning all 3
‡Work not related to position at Amazon or Google.
*Number of job openings on the ACR job board based on accessing the site on May 26, 2024.
†We note that in the clinical context, 3D medical imaging is considered as a subset of cross-sectional imaging where the pixels are isotropic.
In this paper, we use the term 3D to align with the terminology used by the machine learning community describing the simultaneous processing
of pixels originating from 3 spatial dimensions
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
dimensions are synthesized to generate insights. Moreover, existing methods do not leverage supervision from the
multiple data types, including EHR diagnosis codes and radiology reports, available in clinical settings.
The potential clinical impact of 3D medical imaging models may be significant. 3D medical VLMs could assist
radiologists by flagging missed findings,21 accelerating image interpretation workflows, and serving as AI assistants
that draft radiology reports.46,27 The opportunity is particularly substantial for abdominal CT exams, which are
the most commonly utilized 3D examination5 and require significant time for interpretation due to the number of
anatomical structures that need to be examined.6
Nonetheless, adapting existing methods for training VLMs to 3D medical imaging presents a challenge as a single
volumetric image can comprise upwards of 300 individual 2D images, and the corresponding radiology reports
can exceed 300 words.6 Training models on these large data samples can also require significant computational
resources, which are often not available in academic institutions or within hospital systems where the data resides.47
Furthermore, clinically-relevant evaluations for benchmarking 3D VLMs across a suite of tasks is still lacking.
Even in the clinical large language model (LLM) space, where progress is rapid, popular benchmarks based on
medical licensing exams garner criticism for not reflecting real-world clinical use cases.48,49 Due to these training
and evaluation challenges, there exists a dearth of methods for training and evaluating 3D medical imaging VLMs
that can be adapted for a wide range of downstream tasks.
In this paper, we focus on developing and evaluating foundation VLMs for 3D abdominal CT scans to enhance
image understanding across a variety of tasks. Our work provides the following contributions:
1. We develop a training strategy and foundation model called Merlin‡ that leverages the structured and
unstructured data within hospitals to train an abdominal CT visual model. Using this training strategy,
we train a vision-language model on a single GPU using paired CTs (6,387,231 images from 15,331
CTs), EHR diagnosis codes (1,839,559 codes), and radiology reports (6,036,645 tokens). Merlin allows
processing the entire 3D voxel data in a CT image at once.
2. We evaluate Merlin on a comprehensive set of 6 task types and 752 individual tasks, covering a variety of
diagnostic, prognostic, and quality-related tasks. The non-adapted (off-the-shelf tasks) include zero-shot
findings classification (31 findings), phenotype classification (692 phenotypes), and zero-shot cross-modal
retrieval (image to findings and image to impressions), while model adapted tasks include 5-year disease
prediction (6 diseases), radiology report generation, and 3D semantic segmentation (20 organs).
3. We perform internal validation on 5,137 CTs, as well as external validation on 44,098 CTs from three
external sites spanning both abdomen and chest anatomies, and on two publicly available datasets focused
on abdominal CT (VerSe50 and TotalSegmentator51). We demonstrate that our singular Merlin model
outperforms carefully chosen task-specific baselines on our suite of benchmarking tasks.
4. We compare Merlin to state-of-the-art finetuned 2D VLMs, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs, and 3D vision-only
models and show that (i) Merlin’s vision-language pretraining outperforms vision-only pretraining, (ii)
finetuning improves the performance of 2D and 2D-to-3D VLMs though they underperform relative to
Merlin, and (iii) Merlin outperforms other baselines in both data scarce and fully supervised settings.
5. We derive data scaling laws for Merlin, providing guidance about the data requirements for achieving
specific levels of performance. We also present comprehensive ablation studies demonstrating the impact
of various training strategies and the role of the different clinical data types on model performance.
6. We release our trained models, code, and dataset. Our dataset, the Merlin Abdominal CT dataset, has
been manually reviewed to ensure that there is no personal health information in 25,494 CT images and
corresponding radiology reports.
2
Results
We present results across 6 evaluation task types comprising 752 individual tasks, that can be performed off-the-shelf
without adaptation (Figure 1b - Figure 1d), or with additional adaptation (Figure 1e - Figure 1g). The non-adapted
tasks that we evaluate Merlin on include zero-shot classification (31 classification tasks; Figure 1b), phenotype
classification (692 classification tasks; Figure 1c), and zero-shot cross-modal retrieval (image to findings and image
to impressions; Figure 1d). The adapted tasks that we evaluate Merlin on include 5-year disease prediction (6
classification tasks; Figure 1e), radiology report generation (Figure 1f), and 3D segmentation (20 organs; Figure 1g).
We report that training Merlin required approximately 160 hours on a single NVIDIA A6000 GPU.
‡Named after the legendary figure said to be able to perceive everything in the present, our model Merlin simultaneously processes the
entirety of 3D information in a CT volume.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Hepatic      
steatosis
Text
Encoder
Merlin Training Strategy 
Non-Adapted Tasks
Adapted Tasks
Renal cyst 
present
❆
a
b
c
d
317.11 
Alcoholic 
fatty liver
InfoNCE Loss
e
f
g
Image
Encoder
Liver: 
normal
Image
Encoder
Report Supervision
Diagnostic Code Supervision
CT Scan
CT Scan
CT Reports
BCE Loss
Text
Embeddings
Visual
Embeddings
Phenotypes
Zero-shot Findings Classification
Phenotype Classification
Zero-shot Cross-Modal Retrieval
❆
❆
Radiology Report Generation
3D Semantic segmentation
5-Year Disease Prediction
No renal 
cyst
✓
X
Lower thorax: left 
pleural effusion. 
Liver: normal. 
Gallbladder: 
normal.
Lower thorax: 
atelectasis. Liver: 
normal. Gallbladder: 
normal. 
Stomach Injury
h
Lower thorax: 
atelectasis. Liver: 
normal. Gallbladder: 
normal. 
Radiology Report 
Generation
Organ 
Segmentation
Future Disease 
Prediction
Reduce Billing 
Errors
Retrieve similar radiology reports
Lower thorax: left pleural 
effusion. Liver: findings 
normal. Gallbladder: normal.
Lower thorax: Left pleural 
effusion. Liver: normal hepatic 
morphology. Gallbladder: No 
gallbladder abnormalities.
Lower thorax: left pleural 
effusion. Liver: normal. 
Gallbladder: normal.
A
B
C
Figure 1: Overview of Merlin training and evaluation. (a) Merlin training strategy. Diagnosis codes from the EHR are used
as labels for Merlin training, with a binary cross entropy loss. Radiology reports are also used for training, with an InfoNCE
loss.52 Training with diagnosis codes and radiology reports is either staged or performed in a multi-task manner. Merlin is then
evaluated on non-adapted tasks that can be performed without any architectural or weight modifications. These include (b)
zero-shot findings classification, (c) phenotype classification, and (d) zero-shot cross-modal retrieval. Adapting Merlin enables
us to perform (e) 5-year disease prediction, (f) radiology report generation, and (g) 3D semantic segmentation. (h) Illustration of
Merlin’s potential clinical applications. Merlin can assist radiologists by generating radiology reports and segmenting organs
from CT scans. Additionally, it can facilitate the retrieval of radiology reports from patients with similar CT scans, aid clinicians
in identifying potential future disease for patients, and help minimize billing errors by assigning ICD codes.
2.1
Zero-shot Findings Classification
Zero-shot findings classification assesses Merlin’s ability to classify the presence of common imaging findings
based on text prompts that a user can develop, which are likely distinct from prompts seen during training. In Figure
2b we evaluate Merlin zero-shot classification across 30 abdominal CT findings on our internal and external clinical
datasets. Merlin achieves an average F1 score of 0.741 (95%CI [0.727-0.755]) on the internal validation dataset and
an average F1 score of 0.647 (95%CI [0.607-0.678]) on the external validation dataset, significantly outperforming
off-the-shelf 2D OpenCLIP53 with K=1 pooling and finetuned 2D BioMedCLIP54 with average pooling (p < 0.001)
in both settings (Figure 2b). Additional zero-shot ablation results for OpenCLIP and BiomedCLIP are presented
in Supplemental Figure 10. Qualitatively, we observe in Figure 2c that Merlin’s external performance remains
high on diseases with coarse-grained or salient features, e.g. pleural effusion, splenomegaly, ascites, surgically
absent gallbladder, prostatomegaly, anasarca, and abdominal aortic aneurysm. Performance expectedly decreases on
more challenging findings that require more subtle and fine-grained features, e.g. appendicitis, metastatic disease,
lymphadenopathy, and free air. We also plot Merlin performance without radiology report splitting (W/O splitting
in Figure 2c). Radiology report splitting refers to splitting the radiology reports into sections describing different
anatomical structures for subsequent contrastive learning (e.g. "liver: normal" and "vasculature: patent"). Without
radiology report splitting, Merlin achieves an average F1 score of 0.656 (95%CI [0.640, 0.671]), similar to the
Merlin external evaluation performance. On a separate external dataset (VerSe55 vertebral fracture detection), Merlin
achieves a zero-shot F1 of 0.767 (95%CI [0.623-0.867]). In Figure 2d, we establish quantitative relationships to
assess how expanding the pretraining dataset would improve zero-shot classification. This analysis helps determine
the extent of pretraining data necessary for obtaining a specified zero-shot classification performance.
Compared to the ablations, Merlin (I3D initialization56 where 2D ImageNet pretrained weights are reused within
the 3D model, multi-task learning with EHR and radiology reports versus training in stages, and radiology report
splitting) performs the best with an F1 score of 0.741 (95%CI [0.727-0.755]) (Figure 2e). Report splitting and
staging training across the EHR and radiology reports results in second best performance. Learning directly from
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
the radiology reports without any EHR supervision, along with radiology report splitting, results in the third best
performance. These settings achieve F1 scores of 0.735 (95%CI [0.719-0.748]) and 0.730 (95%CI [0.714, 0.744]),
respectively. The largest impact on performance is driven by the choice of whether or not to split the radiology
reports. Relative to Merlin, without report splitting, the performance drops by an average of 7.9 F1 points (p « 0.01).
We further reformulated the zero-shot classification task into a supervised zero-shot findings classification task to
compare zero-shot Merlin against supervised Merlin baselines using 10% and 100% pretraining data (Figure 8d). In
line with prior work from the original CLIP paper,29 zero-shot Merlin outperformed all supervised baselines in both
data-scarce (10% training data) and fully-labeled (100% training data) supervised experiments, achieving a 45.0%
increase in F1 score with 10% training data and a 29.0% increase with 100% training data (Figure 8d). Specifically,
zero-shot Merlin outperformed supervised Merlin in the 100% training data setting, achieving a 16.0% increase in
F1 score (0.741; 95% CI [0.727-0.755] versus 0.641; 95% CI [0.574-0.701]). Additionally, Merlin trained with
100% of the data achieved a 13.0% increase in F1 score than Merlin trained on 10% of the data, which had an F1
score of 0.577 (95% CI [0.516-0.634]).
2.2
Phenotype Classification
The goal of this task is to use CT scans to directly predict phenotypes57 (based on groupings of ICD codes) that
were assigned to patients during their hospital admission that included the CT scan. We evaluate the performance
of Merlin in predicting 692 phenotypes defined in PheWAS.57 We find that Merlin reaches a macro-average area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) across phenotypes of 0.812 (95% CI, 0.808-0.816), and
achieves AUROCs over 0.85 for 258 phenotypes (37% of all phenotypes), and AUROCs over 0.9 for 102 phenotypes
(15% of all phenotypes).
In Figure 3a, we group the 692 phenotypes into groups of similar phenotypes using established methods (exclusion
ranges defined in the PheWAS database57) and report prevalence and average performance within the top 20 most
prevalent groups in the internal test set. We find that abdominal pain is the most prevalent phenotype group (68%
prevalence), followed by noninfective gastrointestinal disorders (51% prevalence). Measuring average model
performance across the phenotypes within each group, we find that Merlin performs well in detecting diseases
across a range of organ systems, including the liver, kidneys, ureters, and gastrointestinal tract.
In Figure 3b we compute data scaling law curves to assess how Merlin performance improves with respect to
training data. Similar to zero-shot classification, we find that increasing training data improves performance.
In Figure 3c and Figure 3d, we compare performance across 7 model variations, with different model backbones,
architectures, and training paradigms. We make the following observations: i) model performance consistently
improves across model size, ii) smaller convolutional receptive fields improve performance, with smaller z-dimension
kernel sizes and strides in the model stem performing best (Figure 3d), iii) ResNet backbones, with in-plane and out-
of-plane kernel size of 3, outperform ConvNeXt58 backbones (in-plane kernel size of 7) that have out-of-plane kernel
sizes of 3 (ConvNeXt-B*) or 7 (ConvNeXt-B) at all layers of the network (Figure 3c). The Swin Transformer59
backbone performs the worst, with a window size of 7 and patch size of 4. Due to the computational complexity of
the attention mechanism, the number of parameters of the Swin Transformer is lowest (3 million). The trend that
we observe across model variations as measured by average AUROC aligns with the trend described by average
AUPRC.
2.3
Zero-shot Cross-Modal Retrieval
Zero-shot cross-modal retrieval evaluates the model’s ability to match a CT image with the corresponding radiology
report findings or impressions section and vice versa. In Figure 4b, we plot the distribution of radiology report
findings and impressions lengths. We find that 21% of findings sections have lengths that exceed 512 tokens,
motivating our choice of the clinical Longformer60 text encoder (OpenCLIP53 and BioMedCLIP54 only allow
maximum token lengths of 77 and 256, respectively). We find that Merlin significantly (p << 0.01) outperforms
OpenCLIP and BioMedCLIP on the task of 3D retrieval for retrieving the correct findings out of 64 cases (Image →
Findings in Figure 4c). We find similar performance for retrieving the correct CT scan out of 64, given a findings
section (Findings →Image in Figure 4c). We also find that on even larger pools of data that Merlin outperforms
existing baselines (Supplemental Figure 12).
Retrieving the impressions section from radiology reports provides evidence that Merlin generalizes to out-of-
distribution text, given that Merlin training uses the findings sections. Figure 4c demonstrates that Merlin generalizes
to the task of retrieving the correct impressions section given a scan (Image →Impressions) and retrieving the
correct scan given an impressions section (Impressions →Image). On the external test set, retrieval performances
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
decreases (Figure 4c). However, it is important to note that the structure and language used in reports varies
significantly across institutions. Nonetheless, the external Merlin performance remains 5-7x better than the external
baselines.
We conduct a model ablation study (Figure 4d) to investigate i) the impact of ImageNet initialization with I3D
weights, ii) the impact of either staged training or multi-task learning using the EHR and radiology reports, and
iii) the impact of training with full reports or reports that are split across anatomical regions. We find that the
top-performing model variation uses I3D initialization, multi-task learning with the EHR and radiology reports, and
no report splitting. We hypothesize that report splitting does not improve performance on the retrieval task since
retrieval prompting is performed with the full report sections. Splitting the report into subparts and additionally
learning directly from the radiology reports without any EHR supervision results in the second and third best
performance, respectively.
Finally, we find that model performance improves with pretraining dataset size both for image and findings retrieval
and image and impressions retrieval via the data scaling curve in Figure 4e.
2.4
Multi-Disease 5-Year Prediction
Multi-disease 5-year prediction measures the model’s ability to predict whether a patient will develop a chronic
disease within 5 years, given that they are not diagnosed with the disease when their CT scan was acquired. We
fine-tune Merlin to opportunistically predict which patients, who are healthy at baseline, will be diagnosed with
any of 6 chronic diseases (chronic kidney disease, osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, ischemic heart disease,
hypertension, and diabetes) in the ensuing 5 years based on their CT scan. On average across these 6 diseases,
Merlin predicts disease onset within 5 years with an AUROC of 0.757 (95%CI [0.743, 0.772]) using 100% of the
downstream labels, and outperforms the ImageNet pretrained (I3D) image-only model by 7% (Figure 5b). Even
using 10% of labels, Merlin predicts disease onset within 5 years with an AUROC of 0.708 (95%CI [0.692, 0.723]),
and outperforms the ImageNet pretrained model by 4.4% (Figure 5b). Using Merlin for disease risk stratification
can produce similar accuracy as using an ImageNet pretrained model, while utilizing 10x reduced labeled training
data. These results depict that even fewer than 25 positive cases (10% of training data) can be used to build future
disease risk stratification models using Merlin. Our model ablation study demonstrates that 3 configurations, all
of which use I3D initialization, provide similar performance. Report training only with report splitting (AUROC
of 0.758 (95%CI [0.743, 0.773])), multi-task EHR and report training without report splitting (AUROC of 0.757
(95%CI [0.743, 0.772])), and our Merlin configuration with multi-task EHR and report training, along with report
splitting, (AUROC of 0.757 (95%CI [0.743, 0.772])) all produce comparable results.
2.5
Radiology Report Generation
Radiology report generation evaluates Merlin’s capacity for generating reports based on the CT images. We select
RadFM37 as a baseline, as it is a multi-modal text generation model where the training dataset includes abdominal
CT scans. Based on the quantitative metrics of RadGraph-F1,61 BERT Score,62 ROUGE-2,63 and BLEU score,64
Merlin consistently outperforms RadFM across anatomical sections and the full report findings (Figure 6b).
Qualitatively, we observe that Merlin generates reports with correct structure, where findings are placed within
the correct anatomical section. When Merlin predicts the presence of a finding, the finding or a related finding
usually exists in the image. For example, in the Merlin generated report in Figure 6c, Merlin correctly identifies that
"the endometrial strip is thickened". Nonetheless, we observe that Merlin tends to under-report positive findings.
For instance, in the example in Figure 6c, Merlin does not report the cholelithiasis finding, which is present in the
human generated report and in the CT image. As this is an early demonstration of radiology report generation based
on CT scans, we anticipate room for improvement in the generated reports.
2.6
3D Semantic Segmentation
3D semantic segmentation evaluates whether Merlin learns geometric information about various anatomical
structures. We conduct all experiments within the nnUNet framework to ensure a fairer comparison between model
architecture and weight initialization by standardizing data-preprocessing, training, and inference. We find that with
10% of training cases, Merlin outperforms nnUNet by 4.7% in average Dice score (Figure 7b). This demonstrates
that Merlin pretraining is particularly beneficial in label scarce scenarios. However, the nnUNet model in the 100%
training data domain performs slightly better than the Merlin-initialized model, with a Dice score difference of
approximately 0.006 (Figure 7b). Among the different initialization strategies for the Resnet152 encoder-decoder
framework (ImageNet, random, and Merlin), the performance difference is around 0.01. However, we observe a
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
much larger performance gap, a 6.3% decrease in Dice score, between the fully convolutional segmentation models
and the Swin UNETR architecture for this task. Overall, Merlin’s weight initialization outperforms other Resnet-152
initialization strategies in both the 10% and 100% training data settings and nnUNet in the 10% training data setting
across all 20 organs.
Across 20 different organs in the test set, we compared the average Dice score of segmentation models (Figure 7c).
On a per-organ basis, in the 10% training data domain, Merlin achieves better performance than nnUNet on 12 out
of 20 organs, with one organ showing an improvement of over 10% and five organs having a 5% improvement.
Notably, Merlin demonstrates a 41.0% improvement in Dice score on the prostate compared to nnUNet. Figure 7d
presents qualitative segmentation results, where the red arrows indicate differences in the predicted segmentations
relative to the ground truth. We observe that nnUNet makes mistakes in all three slices, while Merlin makes a
mistake in two of the three slices. Top row, center column: nnUNet undersegments a small part of the descending
colon. Middle row, center and right columns: nnUNet oversegments the urinary bladder and Merlin undersegments
the inferior small bowel. Bottom row, center column: both nnUNet and Merlin improperly segment the urinary
bladder.
The slightly improved segmentation performance of nnUNet over Merlin in the 100% domain may be attributed to
two features. nnUNet’s 3D full-resolution architecture is shallower compared to the 152 layers of Merlin’s Resnet152
(optimized for discriminative tasks), which may reduce potential overfitting. Furthermore, the hyperparameters and
pre-processing in the nnUNet framework are specifically tuned for segmentation for a 3D full-resolution architecture,
ensuring that the effective receptive field size is appropriately large for the patch size.65 This contrasts with the
weight-initialized, inflated Resnet152 architecture used in Merlin, which outperforms nnUNet in the 10% training
data setting while maintaining state-of-the-art performance across numerous tasks.
2.7
Alternative Architecture Experiments
Our results from linear probe experiments demonstrate the advantages of Merlin’s 3D vision-language pretraining
strategy over 2D finetuned VLMs, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs, 3D vision-only models, Microsoft’s MedImageInsight
model,66 and Google CT foundation model67 (Figure 8). We further show advantages of Merlin pretraining in
the data-scarce (10% training data setting) on the findings-based disease classification task (Figure 8d) and on the
EHR phenotypes task (Supplemental Figure 11b). These performance gains were also observed in full finetuning
evaluations documented in Supplementary Section C.1. Specifically, through our experiments, we observe that: (i)
vision-language pretraining outperforms vision-only pretraining, (ii) finetuning improves the performance of 2D
and 2D-to-3D VLMs though they underperform relative to Merlin, (iii) Merlin outperforms recent CT embedding
foundation models (Figure 8).
2D VLMs: The 2D VLMs demonstrated relatively consistent performance between both finetuning and no finetuning
scenarios on the linear probe classification tasks, with finetuned 2D ResnetCLIP performing comparably to the
other finetuned models. For example, when trained on 100% of the data for the findings-based disease classification
task, ResnetCLIP achieved an F1 score of 0.427 (95% CI [0.381-0.470]), which was similar to OpenCLIP (0.423,
95% CI [0.381-0.463]) and BiomedCLIP (0.424, 95% CI [0.378-0.0.470]). However, 2D VLMs underperformed
compared to Merlin, with a 54.7% lower F1 score for findings-based disease classification task and 59.3% lower
AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task in the 100% training data setting (Figure 8d-e).
2D-to-3D lifted VLMs: 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs showed consistent performance across tasks and demonstrated
performance improvements compared to their 2D VLM counterparts. On the findings-based disease classification
task, they achieved a 19.7% increase in F1 score and a 42.9% increase in AUPRC compared to finetuned 2D
VLMs in the 100% training data setting (Figure 8d). Similarly, on the EHR phenotype task, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs
outperformed their 2D VLMs baselines, with a 14.2% increase in AUROC and a 47.0% increase in AUPRC (Figure
8e). Despite these improvements, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs underperformed relative to Merlin. Specifically, Merlin
had 32.1% higher F1 scores on the findings-based disease classification task and a 39.8% higher AUROC on the
EHR phenotype classification task compared to the 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs (Figure 8d-e).
3D vision-only models: 3D models trained from scratch or with SSL pretraining had a 41.1% decrease in F1
score on the findings-based disease classification task and a 35.8% decrease in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes
task compared to Merlin in the 100% training data setting (Figure 8d-e). Among the 3D vision-only baselines,
SwinUNETR trailed 3D Resnet SSL, with a 6.3% decrease in F1 score on the findings-based disease classification
task and a 18.0% decrease in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task. The two 3D Resnet models underperformed
relative to Merlin, with a 36.9% decrease in F1 score on the findings-based disease classification task and a 28.6%
decrease in AUPRC on the EHR phenotypes task (Figure 8d-e). Although 3D vision-only models outperformed the
2D and 2D-to-3D VLMs with a 6.02% increase in F1 score on the findings-based disease classification task and
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
12.0% increase in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task, Merlin still achieved the best quantitative performance
across all tasks (Figure 8d-e).
CT Embedding Foundation Models: Although MedImageinsight showed a 52.5% increase in AUROC from the
10% to 100% training data setting on the EHR phenotype task (Supplemental figure 11), it still underperformed
relative to Merlin with a 33.8% lower F1 on the findings-based disease classification task and 16.6% lower AUROC
on the EHR phenotype classification task (Figure 8d-e). Merlin also outperformed the 3D Google CT foundation
model, achieving a 5.01% higher F1 and 7.68% higher AUROC on the findings-based disease and EHR phenotype
tasks (Figure 8d-e). We therefore find that all alternative architecture baselines underperform relative to Merlin
across all label settings and tasks.
2.8
External Validation Experiments
We draw from a dataset of over 100,000 external CT scans to evaluate Merlin on a total of 44,098 external CT scans,
comprising 37,855 abdominal CTs from three external sites and 6,243 chest CTs from site #3. Merlin demonstrates
consistent and accurate performance across sites and anatomies, overcoming distributional shifts between training
and external testing sets (Supplemental Table 12), and consistently outperforms alternative architecture baselines
and chest CT foundation models (Figure 9).
Zero-shot findings classification: We evaluated Merlin on the 30 abdominal findings part of our zero-shot
evaluation framework, without any finetuning, using abdominal CT scans for our three external datasets (Figure 9) to
assess the robustness of its embeddings to out-of-distribution data sources. For comparison, we include alternative
architectures 2D/2D-to-3D BiomedCLIP, OpenCLIP, and ResnetCLIP. Across all sites, Merlin outperformed the
second-best alternative architecture baseline by 19.7% on average F1 and demonstrated consistent disease-specific
performance across external cohorts (Figure 9a-b). Specifically, at out-of-state site #1, Merlin exceeded 2D-to-3D
BiomedCLIP by 34.4%; at in-state site #2, it outperformed 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP by 15.7%; and at in-state site #3,
it maintained an 8.9% advantage over 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP. These differences largely reflect distribution shifts in
patient age, slice thickness, scanner manufacturer, and radiologist reporting patterns (Supplemental Table 12). We
attribute Merlin’s improved performance here to its full 3D image encoder pretraining.
Chest CT linear probe evaluation. We evaluate Merlin against recent chest CT FMs68,69,70 and find that, even
when training only a linear probe on a frozen Merlin image encoder, Merlin outperforms chest CT FMs by 12.3% on
average AUC (Figure 9c-d). Given that Merlin, which was exclusively trained on abdominal CT scans, outperforms
other vision-language models trained explicitly on chest CT scans, this demonstrates the generalizability of the
Merlin model. Specifically, Merlin surpasses CT-CLIP by 24.7%, M3FM by 14.0%, and achieves equivalent
performance to CT-FM. We attribute Merlin’s strong performance on this task to this combination of full-volume
3D processing and diverse multi-modal pretraining.
3
Discussion
In this study, we curate a high-quality clinical dataset comprising of paired CT scans (10,628,509 total 2D images
from 25,528 CT scans), EHR data (2,995,293 ICD codes), and radiology reports (10,051,571 total tokens in the
findings sections). With this dataset, we train Merlin, a 3D vision-language foundation model for interpreting
abdominal CT scans that leverages structured EHR data and unstructured radiology report supervision. Merlin is
trained on a single GPU, demonstrating that compute-constrained hospitals and research institutions can build their
own models, as well as highlighting the opportunity to train larger models with additional compute and data. We
demonstrate that Merlin can generalize to 6 types of downstream tasks with 752 individual tasks. Non-adapted
tasks include zero-shot findings classification (31 classes), phenotype classification (692 classes), and zero-shot
cross-modal retrieval (including both image to findings and image to impressions retrieval). Model adapted tasks
include 5-year disease prediction (6 classes), radiology report generation, and 3D semantic segmentation (20 organs).
We outperform carefully chosen single-task baseline models across all tasks. We further contextualize our methods
with comprehensive ablation studies that demonstrate Merlin’s performance as a function of the underlying model
architecture and the design considerations for the use of the underlying data. For training our Merlin foundation
model, we demonstrate the benefit of I3D weight initialization, multi-task learning with EHR and reports, and
splitting the radiology reports into anatomical sections. Overall, we depict how Merlin may assist in interpretation of
abdominal CT scans and mitigate the burden on radiologists, while simultaneously adding value for new biomarker
discovery and future disease risk stratification using pre-existing datasets.
Unlike traditional radiology AI tools that largely focused on bespoke classification tasks,71,72 Merlin offers a
suite of capabilities to support clinicians across various diagnostic, prognostic, and research tasks (Figure 1h).
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
When a patient undergoes an abdominal CT scan prescribed by their provider, Merlin can streamline the clinical
workflow. As the radiologist reviews the CT scan, Merlin can generate a preliminary draft of the radiology report
and provide a list of common findings, aiding with interpretation efficiency. Additionally, Merlin’s multimodal
retrieval capabilities enable content-based image retrieval, allowing finding similar prior studies. This ability can
facilitate improved clinical decision-making by providing radiologists and referring providers with relevant patient
cases for comparison. Beyond diagnostic tasks, Merlin can assist with opportunistic analysis of the image for
diagnosing current or future disorders using its ability of organ segmentation and future disease prediction. Using
the abdominal CT image, Merlin can also identify the appropriate ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes, allowing for appropriate
diagnostic coding for patients. This automation may reduce the risk of billing errors and claim denials, which can
arise from incorrect coding.73,74
Prior approaches for 3D CT pretraining focus on image-only pretraining.75,76,77 These methods leverage masked
autoencoders (MAEs),78 which train a model to reconstruct the input image, given that some part of the input
is masked out. This approach has been demonstrated to be beneficial for 3D segmentation tasks, where the
decoder network is included in pretraining. However, the quality of the latent space representations for a variety
of downstream tasks on CT images has not been demonstrated. It is possible that while MAEs require the latent
space to encode the geometric information necessary to reconstruct the input, this geometric information reduces the
effectiveness of the latent representations for image classification tasks. For image classification, it may be beneficial
to discard this geometric information. In contrast to MAEs, Merlin trains the latent representations directly using
supervision from EHR diagnosis codes and radiology reports. We demonstrate that these representations are useful
for a variety of downstream task types, including tasks involving text and images, which cannot be accomplished
using image-only pretraining methods.
Recent concurrent research has started to investigate 3D vision language models for radiology, particularly focusing
on chest and head CT scans.79,67 However, the extent of experiments and 3D evaluations are limited. These studies
lack systematic ablation studies and do not utilize all available clinical data, including EHR. In addition to exploring
the use of multiple clinical data types for supervision, we carry out a wide array of experiments and evaluations that
contextualize the methodological choices we make in the development of Merlin.
Through the ablation studies, we find that I3D weight initialization56 is helpful for all tasks that we examine with
ablation studies. Furthermore, training with both EHR diagnoses and radiology reports is beneficial over training
with either alone. The manner of combining these supervision sources is important, with multi-task training using
EHR and radiology reports outperforming staged training. Nonetheless, report-only contrastive pretraining accounts
for the vast majority of the gains, and the modest additional improvement from incorporating EHR diagnoses
may not justify the added complexity in settings where such data are difficult to obtain. Additionally, we find that
report splitting, while essential for zero-shot classification, slightly degrades zero-shot retrieval performance. This
reinforces that pretraining is most effective when the pretraining data distribution matches the downstream task
distribution. Splitting the radiology reports results in text that better aligns with prompts for zero-shot classification,
but less closely resembles the radiology report text used for retrieval tasks.
We also demonstrate the advantages of Merlin’s 3D vision-language pretraining strategy over finetuned 2D VLMs,
2D-to-3D lifted VLMs, 3D vision-only models, and recent CT embedding foundation models.66,67 Specifically,
we find that (i) vision-language pretraining outperforms vision-only pretraining, (ii) finetuning improves the
performance of 2D and 2D-to-3D VLMs though they underperform relative to Merlin, (iii) Merlin outperforms
recent CT embedding foundation models, and (iv) Merlin outperforms other baselines in both data-scarce and fully
supervised settings. Merlin outperformed 3D vision-only SSL and non-SSL methods, suggesting that language
alignment provides a stronger self-supervision signal during CLIP pretraining compared to 3D vision-only SSL
approaches. Additionally, 2D VLMs exhibited limited capacity to capture volumetric representations required
for evaluation tasks, presumably due to their inability to process full 3D volumes. Similarly, 2D-to-3D lifted
models failed to effectively encode volumetric information, as their projection layers insufficiently compressed
multi-slice data relative to Merlin’s full-volume processing. Furthermore, in the supervised findings-based disease
classification task, zero-shot Merlin still outperformed linear probing, mirroring the results observed in the original
CLIP experiments,29 likely due to its ability to leverage the pretrained alignment between vision and language
modalities. This alignment enabled zero-shot inference to generalize well across tasks, even without task-specific
finetuning. Overall, our findings suggest that 3D VLM pretraining through Merlin demonstrates trends consistent
with other foundation model studies.80
Beyond outperforming alternative architecture baselines, Merlin demonstrates strong generalizability across diverse
external datasets. Merlin maintained consistent and strong performance when evaluated on over 44,000 external CT
scans spanning multiple sites and anatomies. These results highlight the model’s ability to handle distributional
shifts between training and testing cohorts, including differences in patient demographics, acquisition parameters,
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
and reporting practices. Importantly, these findings suggest that Merlin’s pretraining captures features that can
generalize across sites, providing a foundational backbone for CT foundation model development and applications.
In light of our findings, we identify key areas that could significantly enhance the performance of Merlin and other
future 3D medical imaging models:
1. Increasing dataset size: Expectedly, our initial data scaling results show that using a larger pretraining
dataset improves Merlin’s performance (Figure 2d, Figure 3b, Figure 4e). Our data scaling curves across
tasks can serve as a useful prospective reference measure in evaluating adequate sizes of training datasets
for a requisite task performance. We note that as we add more data, we may need to update our model
architecture, which was optimized at our current data scale.
2. Improving image resolution: Utilizing higher resolution images is expected to enhance model performance,
as suggested by prior studies on vision-language models.81,82,83 This may only hold until the resolution
used for training is equal to the resolution of the original CT scan, and we are no longer downsampling the
CT scan. It is important to note that increasing the physical resolution during image acquisition may not
always yield better results. Radiologists often do not use the highest resolution available during acquisition
in abdominal CT scans, particularly regarding slice thickness, since this may come at the expense of lower
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
3. Optimizing batch size: Improving batch size is a challenge with 3D medical imaging where the size of the
images is significant. However, prior work demonstrates that large batch sizes are beneficial for contrastive
pretraining.83,84
4. Extending to additional anatomies and modalities: Our Merlin model lays the groundwork for training
anatomy- and modality-specific radiology foundation models. Future work can explore the relative benefits
of pretraining on multiple anatomies for the same modality, multiple modalities for the same anatomy,
or both. For such experiments, it is imperative to benchmark the benefit that each modality or anatomy
provides, and we hope that our rigorous evaluation strategy can help highlight optimal data mixtures for
training next-generation radiology foundation models.
Beyond the strengths of our study, there are also limitations of our model and our work. First, towards our goal
of allowing compute-constrained health systems to train and finetune foundation models, we train and evaluate
Merlin using a single GPU. This may limit the generalizability of some of our findings as task performance may
increase by simply scaling up compute resources. Second, the limited number of publicly-available baselines for
abdominal CT, especially VLM baselines, makes it challenging to understand the relative efficacy of our methods.
On the other hand, we believe that Merlin could establish a strong and task-agnostic initial baseline for abdominal
CT. Third, further exploration is required to optimize Merlin for the tasks of radiology report generation and 3D
segmentation. For radiology report generation, there are numerous parameters that can be tuned, primarily regarding
the adapter and LLM. While we devise an initial performant strategy for direct report generation, we leave further
optimization of the adapter and LLM to future work. Likewise, adapting Merlin for segmentation requires adding
a decoder network. Future work can explore additional architectural parameters and optimization strategies for
decoder training.
4
Methods
4.1
Datasets: Paired CT Scan, Unstructured Radiology Report, and Structured EHR
Medical imaging presents the opportunity to capture supervision signal from both the structured information in the
EHR, as well as the unstructured information in radiology reports. We focus on abdominal CT images, as abdominal
CTs are the most common 3D imaging examination.5
All datasets used in this study were under IRB approval with a waiver of informed consent due to the use of
retrospective data. To collect the dataset, we identified patients from our academic medical center who underwent
consecutive abdominal CT examinations from December 2012 to October 2018. This resulted in a high quality
clinical dataset comprising 18,321 patients, from inpatient (37%), emergency services (35%), outpatient (16%), and
observation (8%). We collected the following data for each patient:
CT Studies: We obtain full abdominal CT studies, each comprising multiple CT series. From each study, we
select the series with the most axial slices, maximizing the amount of information in the CT volume. This results
in 10,628,509 2D images from 25,528 CTs. This sampling may include the non-contrast series and put the image
embeddings at a disadvantage relative to the radiology reports since contrast enhancement patterns may not be
apparent on the non-contrast series. To remedy this, we run an open source abdominal CT contrast-phase detection
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
algorithm that has been validated previously85 on the selected CT series. We use this algorithm as the image
meta-data related to contrast phase is often missing or inaccurate. We find that 97% of the selected series are portal
venous phase, while 2.4%, 0.45%, and 0.26% scans are delayed, arterial, and non-contrast phases, respectively.
Radiology Reports: We compile the associated radiology reports for each CT study. These reports consist of
multiple sections, most predominantly the findings and impressions sections. The findings section includes detailed
observations from each organ system. The impressions section contains a description of the most clinically important
findings. We use only the findings sections for training, given the granularity of information provided and previous
work demonstrating the efficacy of this approach.86 We find that there are 10,051,571 tokens from the radiology
report findings sections in our dataset.
EHR: Beyond the images and reports, we acquire EHR data for each patient. In this work, we leverage the diagnosis
information, in the form of ICD codes, for model training. To link ICD codes with CT scans, we collect the ICD
codes that were assigned during the patient encounter that generated the CT. There are 954,013 assigned ICD9
codes with 5,686 unique ICD9 code values in our dataset. There are 2,041,280 ICD10 codes with 10,867 unique
ICD10 code values. In total, there are 2,995,293 assigned codes in the dataset with 16,553 unique values.
4.2
Vision-Language-EHR Model
We aim to leverage both structured EHR and unstructured radiology report information as supervision signal to train
a CT visual model.
CT Scan Preprocessing: We reformat all CT scans so that the first axis points from left to right, the second from
posterior to anterior, and the third from inferior to superior. We then resample the in-plane axial images to 1.5mm
resolution and the out-of-plane slice thickness to 3mm spacing using bilinear interpolation. We map the Hounsfield
unit range -1000:1000 to the range 0:1, clipping values that fall outside of this range. Finally, we pad and center
crop to 224 by 224 pixels in-plane and 160 pixels out-of-plane.
EHR Preprocessing: From the EHR, we extract all ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes that are assigned during the hospital
visits where the abdominal CT studies are carried out. Furthermore, we observe that often codes can comprise
disparate characters but have similar underlying phenotypic meaning. For example, the ICD-9 code V12.55 denotes
a personal history of pulmonary embolism, where ICD-9 code 415 represents acute pulmonary heart disease. While
one of these codes describes a history and one describes an acute indication, their imaging phenotypes may appear
similar. Thus, we leverage the PheWAS Phecode Mapping57 to map 16,553 ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes to 1,692
hierarchical phenotypes. Furthermore, we apply phenotype expansion where if a subject is positive for a more
specific phenotype during a particular hospital visit, we propagate this positive label throughout the hierarchical
phenotype tree so they are also positive for all less specific phenotypes. Grouping the ICD codes in our dataset
results in 1,692 total phenotypes. For each CT image, we thus have an associated binary vector with a 0 indicating
the absence of a phenotype during the corresponding hospital visit and a 1 indicating the presence of the phenotype.
This supervision signal is coarse grained in that the phenotypes may not be directly associated with pixel values
in the abdominal CT scan; they are associated with the patient’s health status more generally. Thus, the EHR
phenotype codes serve as weak supervision for our model training.
Radiology Report Preprocessing: Using regular expressions, we extract the findings section from each radiology
report. Due to the long radiology reports, we hypothesize that contrastive training may overfit to short and salient
parts of the reports to solve the task. Furthermore, short prompts used for subsequent zero-shot classification would
present a significant domain shift compared to the full reports. Thus, we split the reports into anatomical sections
and during each training step, alternate between presenting the full reports and a single anatomical section. We
rotate through the anatomical sections every other step, presenting the model a single anatomy per batch to allow
the model to compare across different descriptions of the same anatomy. To generate these sections, we use regular
expressions. If the regular expressions fail for a particular report and anatomy, we use the full report. The sections
that we consider are lower thorax, liver and biliary tree, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, adrenal glands, kidneys and
ureters, gastrointestinal tract, peritoneal cavity, pelvic organs, vasculature and lymph nodes, and musculoskeletal.
Model Architecture: Merlin uses an inflated 3D (I3D) ResNet152 for the image encoder. Inflation refers to reusing
2D pretrained model weights and copying those weights across the 3rd dimension of the 3D convolutional kernels.56
Given the long token lengths of the reports (Figure 4b), we use clinical Longformer60 as the text encoder due to its
longer context length (4,096) than other biomedical pretrained masked language models and general domain CLIP
text encoders. Previous work found that pretrained text encoders with longer context length perform better, given
longer captions.33 We also perform architecture ablation studies where we investigate 3D Swin Transformer59 and
ConvNeXt58 architectures (Figure 3c). In addition to architecture ablations, we investigate how the out-of-plane
stride and kernel size in the model stem of the ResNet152 impact performance (Figure 3d). The model stem in the
ResNet152 is a convolutional layer at the input of the network with an in-plane kernel size of 7 and stride of 2,
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
followed by a max pooling layer with a kernel size of 3 and a stride of 2. The model stem thus reduces size of the
input by a factor of 4 in each dimension. The model stem ablation only adjusts parameters in the convolutional
layer of the stem. We maintain the in-plane settings as they are in the 2D version of the models to leverage the
2D pretraining. Furthermore, we assess how inflating the ConvNeXt model with an out-of-plane kernel size of 7,
matching the 2D kernel size of the original 2D weights, performs compared to inflating the ConvNeXt model with
an out-of-plane kernel size of 3. We refer to the model with an out-of-plane kernel size of 3 as ConvNeXt-B* in
Figure 3c. Additionally, we compare various model sizes in Figure 3c. We perform these architecture experiments
using the phenotype classification task due to the simplicity of this supervised task and the strong evaluation signal
that results from averaging performance across a large number of phenotypes.
Model Training: We use binary cross entropy for the phenotype classification loss and InfoNCE52,29 loss for
contrastive learning with the radiology reports, where the embeddings for both the image and text encoders in our
implementation of the InfoNCE loss had a dimension of 512. This matches the embedding dimension used in the
ViT-Base model in OpenCLIP experiments.87 We use an AdamW88 optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e-5,
betas=(0.9, 0.999), and a cosine learning rate scheduler with number of epochs for decay to 0 set to 300. We use
gradient checkpointing for both the visual and text encoders and train with FP16 mixed precision. This allows us to
maximize a batch size of 18 on a single 48GB A6000 GPU.
Multi-Task Learning Versus Staged Training: In addition to training using the EHR phenotypes and radiology
reports jointly in a multi-task manner, we consider staging the training. In this formulation, we first train the Merlin
image encoder using the EHR phenotypes in stage 1. In stage 2, we perform contrastive training with the radiology
reports. To prevent catastrophic forgetting89 of the EHR information learned in stage 1, we include the phenotype
loss function during stage 2 training, with a low relative weight. We use the same hyper-parameters for stage 2 as
we do for multi-task training. For stage 1, we use an AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e-4 and
betas=(0.9, 0.999), as well as an exponential learning rate scheduler with gamma = 0.99. We use a batchsize of 22
on a single A6000 GPU.
Data Splits: We divide the pretraining dataset into splits of size 60% (15,331 CTs) for training, 20% (5,060 CTs)
for validation, and 20% (5,137 CTs) for testing. We ensure that multiple CTs from a single patient do not exist in a
single split. The external dataset, from another university medical center, consists of 7,000 CTs which are used
for testing. The external dataset from out-of-state site 1 consisted of 6,997 abdominal CT scans used for testing.
In-state external sites 2 and 3 included 25,997 and 4,872 abdominal CT scans, respectively, used for testing; site 3
additionally included 6,243 chest CT scans used for testing.
4.3
Evaluations
We select evaluation tasks consisting of non-adapted tasks, which Merlin can perform out of the box without
additional adaptation. These tasks include zero-shot findings classification, phenotype classification, and zero-shot
cross-modal retrieval. We also select tasks that require adapting Merlin, which include 5-year disease prediction,
radiology report generation, and 3D semantic segmentation. We select both non-adapted tasks and adapted
tasks to demonstrate Merlin’s effectiveness without fine-tuning, as well as its adaptability when fine-tuned for
specific applications. To comprehensively evaluate Merlin’s performance against alternative architectures, we
compare Merlin to finetuned 2D VLMs, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs, and 3D vision-only models in data-scarce and
fully-supervised settings.
4.4
Non-Adapted Tasks
Zero-Shot Findings Classification: We consult three radiologists to develop a list of 30 findings that exhibit a
diversity of size and level of difficulty for human diagnosis. For each finding, we generate lists of disease presence
phrases that describe possible sub-types, locations, and severities of the finding. We similarly generate a list of
disease absence phrases, which are ways of describing a negative finding. For example, a disease presence phrase
for ascites could be “large volume ascites present" and a disease absence prompt could be “no ascites". We use
these phrases to mine the radiology reports for negative and positive examples. To standardize the chance metric
value across findings, we balance the number of positive and negative examples for each finding. After extracting
these examples, we manually review them to ensure that the labels are accurate.
To perform zero-shot classification, we follow the procedure in Figure 2a where we embed the CT scan using
the image encoder. We use the disease presence and absence phrases as prompts for zero-shot classification. We
embed each of the prompts using the text encoder. We then compute the cosine similarity between the CT scan
embedding and each of the prompts. Computing the mean cosine similarity across the disease presence prompts and
mean similarity across the disease absence prompts allows us to classify the CT scan as positive or negative for a
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
given finding. We adapt existing 2D baselines (OpenCLIP53 and BioMedCLIP54) for 3D zero-shot classification by
embedding every axial slice of a given CT image. To compute a similarity score between a CT scan and a given
prompt, we take the mean of the cosine similarities between each axial slice and the prompt embedding.
We also perform zero-shot spine fracture detection using the VerSe dataset.55 All CTs in the VerSe dataset were
evaluated for fracture severity at each vertebral level in the thoracolumbar spine. We reorient and resample the VerSe
CTs to match Merlin pretraining. For volumes with fractures, we create a probability map from the fracture grading
annotations and sample high-probability locations to obtain representative sub-volumes. We map the Hounsfield
unit range -1000:1000 to 0:1 and spatially pad and crop the images to 224 × 224 × 160. For volumes without
fractures, we center crop the CTs.
We perform an ablation study where we measure the impact of I3D initialization, staged versus multi-task training
with EHR and radiology reports, and splitting the report text with every other batch for finer grain contrastive
learning (Figure 2e). We also examine how zero-shot performance varies across the pretraining dataset sizes of 1%,
10%, 20%, 40%, and 100% of the total training set (Figure 2d).
Phenotype Classification: To generate the labels for this task, we group ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes into phenotypes
using the PheWAS57 phecode mapping. We compare Swin Transformer, ConvNeXt, and ResNet backbone
architectures (Figure 3c), as well as various model stem hyper-parameters (Figure 3d). See section 4.2 for additional
details. We report average AUROC and AUPRC using all phenotypes that have more than 20 positive examples
in the test set, in order to ensure a meaningful measure of performance. We additionally assess how phenotype
classification performance varies across the pretraining dataset sizes of 1%, 10%, 20%, 40%, and 100% of 15,331
total pretraining samples.
Zero-Shot Cross-Modal Retrieval: In Figure 4(a) we illustrate the procedure for performing zero-shot retrieval.
First, we sample a pool of report findings sections. Then, we embed each of the findings sections using the text
encoder and the corresponding CT scans using the image encoder. We then compute the cosine similarities between
the images and each of the report findings sections. Based on these cosine similarities, we rank the report findings
in order of their similarity to each of the images.
To evaluate retrieval performance, we divide the test dataset into non-overlapping pools and within each pool
evaluate how often the cosine similarity between corresponding CT images and reports is the highest (Recall@1).
To compute the overall score, we average performance across all pools. We compute retrieval performance for
surfacing the most similar findings section given a CT image (Image →Findings in Figure 4c) and the most similar
CT image given a findings section (Findings →Image in Figure 4c). We compute retrieval performance between
images and findings sections on both our internal test dataset (5,137 pairs) and our external dataset (7,000 pairs).
To validate that the model is not learning a shortcut to match images with findings sections, which seems plausible
given the length of the findings sections, we also evaluate retrieval between the images and impressions sections.
Given that during training, Merlin is only exposed to findings sections from the reports, evaluating on semantically
similar, yet distinct impressions sections can provide a measure of generalizability. We also perform this analysis on
our internal test dataset and the external dataset (Figure 4c).
Similar to zero-shot classification, we adapt existing 2D baselines (OpenCLIP and BioMedCLIP) for 3D cross-
modality retrieval by embedding each axial slice of the CT volumes.
As with zero-shot classification, we perform ablation studies where we examine the impact of I3D initialization,
staged versus multi-task training with EHR and radiology reports, and radiology report splitting (Figure 4d). We
also perform data scaling experiments that assess how retrieval performance varies across pretraining dataset sizes
of 1%, 10%, 20%, 40% and 100% of the full pretraining dataset (Figure 4e).
4.5
Adapted Tasks
Multi-Disease 5-Year Prediction: Following previous work,13 we choose 6 chronic diseases based on their
prevalence and the potential for beneficial interventions following early diagnoses: chronic kidney disease (abbr.
CKD; prevalence = 36 million in US90), diabetes mellitus (abbr. DM; prevalence = 35 million in US91), hypertension
(abbr. HTN; prevalence = 120 million in US92), ischemic heart disease (abbr. IHD; prevalence = 21 million in
US93), atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (abbr. CVD; prevalence = 24 million in US94), and osteoporosis (abbr.
OST; prevalence = 10 million in US95).
To create the labels for this task, we extract disease ICD codes of interest from the EHR. We assign patients to one
of 4 categories for each disease based on their ICD codes. Formally, we define td to be the time point marking the
onset of the disease based on the presence of ICD codes, and ts to be the time point marking the date of the CT scan.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
ta is the time point after a CT scan that defines a window starting with the scan date (ts to ta), where the presence
of a new diagnosis indicates a positive case. We set ta to 5 years to ensure an adequate time duration for patient
followup following the CT imaging as well as providing an adequate duration for intervention in future prospective
studies. We define th to be the time point marking the last date of record in a patient’s history. With these time
points, we classify images into the following categories:
• Class 0 (Healthy): The patient is not diagnosed with the specified diseases before their CT scan date (ts)
or during the window from ts to ta. If a patient is diagnosed with the disease, it happens after ta. For
patients to be assigned to class 0, they must have 5 years of followup in their EHR history.
• Class 1 (Progressors): The patient is not diagnosed with the disease before their CT date, ts, but receives
a positive diagnosis between ts and ta.
• Class 2 (Already Progressed): The patient is already diagnosed with the disease before the CT scan date,
ts.
• Class 3 (Censored): The patient has not been monitored long enough to rule out the disease. In this case,
th is before ta and the patient does not receive a positive diagnosis before the end of their EHR history, th.
For training, we use class 1 examples as positive examples and class 0 examples as negative examples. We fine-tune
Merlin on examples that are held out from Merlin pretraining and validation. Furthermore, we do multi-task
multi-disease prediction where the fine-tuned Merlin has one head per disease as shown in Figure 5a. Since we train
jointly on all the diseases, we mask labels in a batch that are from classes other than 0 and 1 for a specific disease.
We use binary cross entropy loss, an AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-5, an exponential learning rate
decay with γ = 0.8, and a batch size of 8 on a single A6000 GPU. We use 60%, 20%, 20% train, validation, and test
splits, and measure performance in both the low-label regime (10% of training labels with 9-20 positive examples
per disease), as well as the medium-label regime (100% of available training labels with 69-136 positive examples
per disease). The number of per-disease positive and negative examples are given in Figure 5.
Radiology Report Generation: Figure 6a demonstrates the procedure for adapting Merlin for report generation.
We first extract image features from the last hidden layer of Merlin, which has size 7x7 in-plane, 10 out-of-plane,
and a feature dimension of 2048. We use a single linear adapter layer to map the features to size 4096. For text
generation, we use RadLlama-7B,42 a version of Llama2-7B that is fine-tuned on MIMIC96 radiology reports and
clinical notes. We fine-tune the linear adapter, as well as 5% of RadLlama-7B parameters using low-rank adaptation
(LoRA).97 We generate the full reports section by section, where we use the following prompt template:
<visual tokens>Generate a radiology report for <organ system>###
<report section>###</s>
For training, we use 8 gradient accumulation steps with a local batch size of 6, giving us a total batchsize of 48. We
use an AdamW optimizer with betas=(0.9, 0.999), a learning rate of 1e-4, and a cosine learning rate scheduler with
500 warmup steps and decay to 0 over 500 epochs.
We compare our model performance on report finding section generation versus RadFM37 using four metrics: BLEU
score64 and ROUGE-2,63 which primarily assess syntactic similarity; RadGraph-F1,61 which assesses findings and
modifiers of findings (e.g. location and severity); and BERT score,62 a model-based score which assesses semantic
similarity. The comparison is conducted both section-by-section and for the full findings sections. Subsequently, we
apply qualitative frameworks98,99 to compare our model generated findings to radiologist findings in Figure 6c. This
consists of densely annotating individual phrases to be correct, mischaracterized, false positive, or false negative.
3D Semantic Segmentation: To adapt Merlin for segmentation, we add a UNet100 decoder and skip connections
between the Merlin encoder and the decoder. Each block of the decoder consists of a 3D transpose convolution
operation, with a kernel size of 2 and a stride of 2 in each dimension, followed by two 3D convolutions, with kernel
sizes of 3 and strides of 1 in each dimension. Each of the two 3D convolution operations is followed by a 3D
batchnorm and ReLU activation. We also add skip connections where outputs from the Merlin ResNet blocks are
concatenated with outputs from the 3D transpose convolution in the decoder before being passed to the subsequent
3D convolutional layers. To mirror pretraining, we segment full volumes of size 224x224x160.
For model training and evaluation, we filter body CT scans from the Total Segmentator dataset using the following
study types: ct pelvis, ct abdomen-pelvis, ct abdomen, ct thorax, ct thorax-abdomen, and ct thorax-abdomen-pelvis.
This gives us 401 scans total. We also select the following organs that appear in abdominal CT: stomach, liver,
gallbladder, left kidney, right kidney, spleen, prostate, T12 vertebrae, L1 vertebrae, L2 vertebrae, L3 vertebrae, L4
vertebrae, L5 vertebrae, S1 vertebrae, sacrum, urinary bladder, colon, duodenum, small bowel, and pancreas. We
use the official Total Segmentator test split for testing, which has 34 scans after filtering. We split the remaining 367
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
scans into 80% training examples (293 scans) and 20% validation examples (74 scans). In addition to training with
all of the training scans, we simulate the label scarce setting by sampling 10% of training scans randomly.
We evaluated various network architectures and initialization strategies within the nnUNet framework. Specifically,
we compared the nnUNet 3D full-resolution architecture with other configurations, including a Swin UNETR,76 an
architecture specifically designed for 3D medical image segmentation, and a Resnet152 encoder-decoder architecture
initialized with random, Imagenet, and Merlin weights (Figure 7a). The training setup followed the default nnUNet
configuration, including data augmentation steps, a 1000-epoch training schedule, and a polynomial learning rate
scheduler. We evaluated the model in both 10% and 100% training data domains using Dice score.
4.6
Alternative Architecture Experiments
2D VLMs: We trained three 2D vision-language foundation models: a 2D Resnet152 vision encoder paired with a
clinical longformer text encoder, OpenCLIP87 finetuned on abdominal CT data, and BiomedCLIP54 finetuned on
abdominal CT data (Figure 8a). Each model used MTL, incorporating EHR phenotypes and radiology reports split
into anatomical sections, to ensure a comparable training approach to the 3D Merlin model. This setup finetuned
both the image and text encoders using the EHR and a contrastive loss head. During training, we randomly selected
a single slice from each 3D volume as input. The Resnet152 model was initialized with ImageNet weights. All
models were finetuned with a batch size of 128, 100 epochs, using 100% of the training data.
2D-to-3D lifted VLMs: To adapt the aforementioned 2D vision-language models for 3D data, we finetuned
the models by processing each slice of the abdominal CT volume individually and concatenating them using a
learned projection layer (Figure 8b). Instead of naive averaging, we propose transforming the features from each
highly-redundant 2D slicewise embeddings from the 3D volume into an unified embedding through this learned
layer. More specifically, the 160 slice embeddings are processed through a sequential linear transformation, first
reducing them to 64 embeddings with a ReLU non-linearity, and then further compressed into a single embedding
of size 512. The image encoder and classification heads from the VLM were then finetuned for 10 epochs on
100% of the training data, with maximal attainable batch sizes of 2, 8, and 16 for 2D Resnet152, OpenCLIP, and
BiomedCLIP, respectively.
3D vision-only models: We trained two state-of-the-art 3D vision-only foundation models: Swin UNETR101 and
Inflated 3D (I3D) Resnet152, using a self-supervised learning (SSL) pretraining strategy76 (Figure 8c). The SSL
pretraining process involved randomly cropping abdominal CT volumes into subvolumes, followed by augmentations
such as random cutout and rotation. These augmented subvolumes were then fed into the models, with pretraining
tasks including inpainting, contrastive learning, and rotation prediction to learn meaningful image representations,
based on prior work.76 For Swin UNETR, pretraining was performed with a batch size of 1, a sliding window size
of 2, and 50K training steps. For I3D Resnet152, the model utilized convolutional embeddings with convolutional
transpose layers for the L1 reconstruction loss. Finetuning the I3D Resnet152 was conducted with a batch size of 3,
a sliding window size of 2, and 50K training steps.
4.7
Alternative Architecture Evaluation
To ensure a fair comparison between the vision-only and vision-language baselines, we evaluate the models on
two tasks: findings-based disease classification and EHR phenotype classification. We here describe the evaluation
tasks, which involve training linear-probes while keeping the image encoder frozen. This setup allows us to
compare pretrained image representations in isolation and compare Merlin to recent CT embedding foundation
models.66,67 Full finetuning results, where both the image encoder and classification heads are trained, are
presented in Supplemental Section C.1. For the 3D vision-only models, the embedding dimensions were 768
for SwinUNETR and 2048 for I3D Resnet152. For the 2D and the 2D-to-3D VLMs, the embedding dimensions
were 768 for BiomedCLIP, 2048 for ResnetCLIP, and 1024 for OpenCLIP. For the CT embedding foundation
models, MedImageInsight used an embedding dimension of 1024, while Google CT Foundation used an embedding
dimension of 1408. Details on processing the Merlin dataset through these CT embedding foundation models are
provided in Supplemental Section C.1.
Findings-based disease classification task: The findings-based disease classification task was adapted from the
zero-shot findings classification task (Section 4.4), where the 30 findings originally used for zero-shot evaluation
were reformulated for supervised learning. We parsed the radiology reports and categorized each finding as
positive, negative, or missing from the report. While most conventional strategies involve discarding missing
labels during training, we adopted a more inclusive strategy to use all our data. We framed the task as a multilabel
classification task, introducing thirty separate binary heads, one for each finding. Image embeddings were used
as input to the multihead linear classifiers, and the loss was masked for subjects missing a specific finding before
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
backpropagation.102,13 Linear probes were trained from scratch using Kaiming initialization with the AdamW
optimizer, an initial learning rate of 1e-5, and a cosine decay scheduler (300 epochs to zero learning rate), for a
total of 10 epochs using binary cross-entropy loss on the abdominal CT dataset (15,331 scans for training and
5,060 for validation). We evaluated the performance of these baselines using 10% and 100% of the training
data. This approach standardizes image encoder evaluation across various model architectures, including 3D
vision-only foundation models, 2D vision-language models, 2D finetuned vision-language models, 2D-to-3D lifted
vision-language models, MedImageInsight, Google CT foundation model, and Merlin.
Phenotype classification For the EHR phenotype classification task, we train a linear probe that maps the em-
beddings to 1,692 target labels. The probe consists of a single linear layer with input dimensionality matching
the model’s image encoder embedding dimensions and an output of 1,692 classes. We use the same optimizer,
scheduler, training hyperparameters, and image dataset as in the multihead linear probe experiments (findings-based
disease classification task). All linear probes were trained from scratch using Kaiming initialization to maintain
consistent comparisons across models. Similar to the findings-based disease classification task, we finetuned the
models on 10% and 100% of the training data to assess classification performance across different dataset sizes.
4.8
External Validation Experiments
We evaluate Merlin on 44,098 external CT scans, comprising 37,855 abdominal CTs from three external sites [Site
#1: n = 6,997, out-of-state site; Site #2: n = 25,986, in-state site; Site #3: n = 4,872, in-state site] and 6,243 chest
CTs from Site #3.
Zero-shot findings classification: We evaluate Merlin on the zero-shot findings classification task and compare
Merlin against alternative architecture baselines: 2D/2D-to-3D BiomedCLIP, OpenCLIP, and ResnetCLIP. All
models were fine-tuned on the Merlin dataset in a multi-task manner, analogous to Merlin’s training. This setup
ensured that observed differences reflected architectural paradigms (2D versus 2D-to-3D versus full 3D [Merlin])
rather than differences in pretraining data quality. Ground-truth labels for zero-shot classification were derived by
matching positive and negative prompts to the findings sections of radiology reports using regular expressions. The
same positive and negative prompts as in the internal test set (Section 4.4) were used. For the External Site #3,
labels were generated using the Qwen3-30B LLM103 applied to the findings section of their abdominal CT reports.
Chest CT linear probe evaluation: We leveraged a dataset of 63,711 chest CTs from External Site #3, comprising
57,468 scans for training and 6,243 for testing. We specifically only trained a linear probe on the frozen Merlin
image encoder to assess the quality of the baseline Merlin embeddings. Each scan is paired with a radiology
report, and labels were derived from the findings section using the Qwen-30B LLM103 to identify 24 conditions:
lung nodules, consolidation, ground-glass opacities, atelectasis, interstitial thickening, emphysema, bronchiectasis,
pulmonary embolism, pulmonary edema, lung cavitations, pleural effusion, pneumothorax, pleural thickening,
lymphadenopathy, dilated aorta, aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, atherosclerosis, pericardial effusion, metastases,
fracture, hepatic cysts, liver mass, and hiatal hernia. We trained only a linear probe using balanced logistic
regression to correct for skewed disease prevalence, without explicit resampling. The implementation was based
on the scikit-learn library, mapping each model’s pretrained embeddings to the extracted labels. From a model
comparison perspective, we evaluated Merlin against recent chest CT foundation models—CT-CLIP,68 M3FM,69
and CT-FM70—by training a separate linear probe for each disease and model.
4.9
Statistical Analysis
We compute 95% confidence intervals using bootstrapping with 1000 samples with replacement for all experiments
except for cross-modal retrieval. For cross-modal retrieval, we divide the test dataset into pools of size N. For
each pool, we compute the average retrieval performance for all examples in the pool. We then compute the 95%
confidence intervals using the distribution of performances across pools. All p-values that we report are one-sided
p-values.
4.10
External Validation Methods
Acknowledgements
A.S.C. receives research support from NIH grants R01 HL167974, R01HL169345, R01 AR077604, R01 EB002524,
R01 AR079431, P41 EB 027060 and P50 HD118632; the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (ARPA-
H) Biomedical Data Fabric (BDF) and the Chatbot Accuracy and Reliability Evaluation (CARE) programmes
(contracts AY2AX000045 and 1AYSAX0000024-01); and the Medical Imaging and Data Resource Center (MIDRC),
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
which is funded by the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) under contract
75N92020C00021 and through the ARPA-H. C.B. receives research support from the Promedica Foundation.
Contributions
L.B. and A.K. collected data, developed code, trained models, ran experiments, analysed results, created figures
and wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript and provided revisions and feedback. J.P.C., A.K.,
D.V.V., M.P., Z.C., J.-B.D., E.R., R.H., C.B., M.E.K.J., S.O., M.V., J.M.J.V., Z.F., Z.N., D.A., W.-H.W., S.G. and
A.S.C. provided technical advice. J.P.C. developed the counterfactual generation method for CT scans and ran
counterfactual experiments. A.K. carried out model evaluations on external datasets. J.L. developed a Merlin
dataset inference pipeline for the Google CT. D.V.V. assisted in collecting zero-shot evaluation labels and facilitated
radiologist annotations of generated reports. S.J.S.G., H.Y. and A.W. ran model inference on external clinical dataset
1. L. Liu, L. Lian, Y.W. and A.Y. ran model inference on external clinical dataset 3. M.P., Z.C., J.-B.D., E.R., C.T.
and E.A.J. assisted with model evaluations. Z.H. and J.F. assisted with dataset anonymization. C.B., E.A.J., N.A.,
G.Z., M.W., A.J., R.D.B., A.W., C.P.L., M.W., J.H. and S.G. provided clinical input and feedback. C.B. provided
counterfactual annotations. S.G. and C.B. provided annotations of generated reports. N.H.S., C.P.L., S.G. and A.S.C.
provided research support for the project. A.S.C. guided the project, serving as principal investigator and advising
on technical details and overall direction. No funders or third parties were involved in study design, analysis or
writing.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
Negative 
Prediction
Stable thrombosis
Partial thrombosis
a
b
There is thrombosis
Disease Presence 
Prompts
Disease Presence Mean 
Cosine Similarity
c
d
e
Disease Absence 
Prompts
Disease Absence Mean 
Cosine Similarity
<
Ascites
Appendicitis
Bowel 
Obstruction
Submucosal
Edema
Hydro-
nephrosis
Hiatal 
Hernia
Renal 
Hypodensity
Renal 
Cyst
Gallstones
No occlusive thrombosis
No venous thrombosis
No thrombosis
Surgically Absent 
Gallbladder
Pancreatic 
Atrophy
Splenomegaly
Biliary Ductal 
Dilation
Hepatomegaly
Hepatic 
Steatosis
Aortic Valve 
Calcification
Coronary 
Calcification
Cardio-
megaly
Pleural 
Effusion
Atelec-
tasis
Metastatic 
Disease
Anasarca
Osteopenia
Fracture
Abdominal 
Aortic 
Aneurysm
Lympha-
denopathy
Thrombosis
Atherosclerosis
Prostatomegaly
Free 
Air
Lower
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
/
and
Biliary
Tree
Thorax
Gallbladder
Kidneys
Gastrointestinal
Peritoneum
Pelvic
Vasculature
Musculoskeletal
Merlin (Internal)
W/O Splitting (Internal)
Merlin (External)
BioMedCLIP (Internal)
Diffuse
❆
Image 
Encoder❆
❆
Text 
Encoder❆
❆
Text 
Encoder❆
Figure 2: Zero-shot findings classification. (a) Depicts how zero-shot classification is performed where text embeddings from
disease presence prompts and disease absence prompts are compare to the image embedding. (b) We compare the performance
of off-the-shelf 2D OpenCLIP53 with K=1 pooling, finetuned 2D BioMedCLIP54 with average pooling, Merlin on an internal
dataset, and Merlin without radiology report splitting. We further evaluate Merlin on an external clinical dataset and the VerSe55
external fracture detection dataset. (c) Performance of finetuned 2D BioMedCLIP, Merlin, and Merlin without report splitting on
the internal dataset, as well as Merlin on the external dataset, across 30 findings assessed on abdominal CT scans. (d) Merlin
zero-shot classification performance improves with increasing pretraining dataset size. (e) An ablation study across various
aspects of Merlin’s pretraining strategy. "Rpt." is shorthand for "report" and indicated training with radiology reports only.
Staged (Stg.) refers to performing weakly supervised training with EHR in a first training stage and then training with radiology
reports in a second stage. This is in contrast to multi-task learning (MTL) where EHR and radiology reports are used for training
simultaneously.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
"+6)+38".+348;5+6495"6+:'1+3)+1')0/3+
')8+6/'13,+)8/43
/7+'7+7!,/*3+;3*%6+8+67
/'(+8+7
745.'-+'1/746*+67
"3+924)43/47+73*93-/7+'7+7
/746*+67!,/54/*+8'(41/72
"7;).414-/)'1/746*+67
 +451'727'1/-3'38!6$+)43*'6;
/746*+67!,19/*!61+)8641;8+
3+2/'7
(3462'1/3*/3-7!,93-7
!8.+6'7864/38+78/3'1
"4/743/3-;69-7!6+*/)/3+
$9(78'3)+#+1'8+*/746*+67
;5+68+37/:+/7+'7+
/:+6/7+'7+
 '97+'3*&42/8/3-
'6*/')43*9)8/43/746*+67
 43/3,+)8/:+'7864/38+78/3'1/746*+67
(*42/3'1"'/3
		
	
		
	
		
	
		
	
		
:+6'-+".+348;5+6495%#!'67


















	




	








	

	



	












 





	
	
	
	
	
 



 $" 

	




	
# !

	




	


# !
!
!
a
d
Total Phecodes = 692 
Upper Quart. Prev. = 8.7%
Lower Quart. Prev. = 0.6%
Smaller receptive !eld
b
c
Total Phenotypes = 692

"  !
 "




	
	

 

!!"#'+$& $$%(%' ! #*%(%' !
%)!"'#%+




	
	


)%
( %
/$'*'+!(*& *
('. ,
('. ,
('. ,
 + ,
 + ,	
 *%$'
Figure 3: Phenotype classification. (a) Average AUROC performance for the top 20 phenotype groups listed in order of
prevalence (black line). (b) Data scaling law experiments that measure how average AUROC and AUPRC scale across the 692
phenotypes as the amount of pretraining data varies. (c) Average AUROC as a function of model stem hyper-parameters. We find
that a smaller receptive field yields better performance. (d) Average AUROC (left chart) and AUPRC (right chart) across all 692
phenotypes, the top quartile of 173 phenotypes, and the botton quartile of 173 phenotypes across several baseline models. All
baseline models are trained using the phenotypes in the pretraining dataset. The dashed lines denote random chance performance.
Note that Merlin, which uses the best performing backbone of ResNet152, is further trained using radiology reports.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
Mean: 394 
21% findings > 512 
Mean: 94 
a
b
Lower thorax: left 
pleural effusion. 
Liver: normal…
Lower thorax: 
normal. Liver: 
hepatis steatosis…
Report Findings Pool
Cosine Similarity
Image ↔ Findings Retrieval
Image ↔ Impressions Retrieval
c
Internal test set:
5,137 CTs
External test set:
7,000 CTs
d
e
In-Distribution Text
Out-of-Distribution Text
❆
❆
Image 
Encoder❆
❆
Text 
Encoder❆
❆
Text 
Encoder❆
Figure 4: Zero-shot cross-modal retrieval. (a) Schematic demonstrating how we perform retrieval. We compute the cosine
similarity between Merlin report embeddings and CT embeddings, enabling us to rank CT and report pairs in order of similarity.
(b) A distribution of the findings section and impressions section lengths shows that 21% of findings have sequence lengths
greater than 512 tokens. (c) Top-1 recall out of pools of 64 findings sections (left), which is considered an in-distribution
evaluation as Merlin is trained using findings sections. We also report top-1 recall on out-of-distribution impressions sections
(right). (d) An ablation study that examines the impact of using I3D ImageNet initialization, multi-task learning (MTL) versus
staged training (Stg.) with EHR and reports versus training with reports only (Rpt.), and splitting the radiology report text
into anatomical sections. (e) Data scaling law experiments that examine the impact of pretraining dataset size on retrieval
performance. The dashed lines indicate random chance performance.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
a
b
5-Year Disease Predictions:
d
100%
10%
CKD
90/513
14/46
DM
80/474
9/46
HTN
111/404
11/34
IHD
69/518
9/49
ASCVD
136/504
20/52
OST
68/527
10/47
Num Positives/Total
🔥
Image 
Encoder
c
Merlin
ImageNet Init
Random Init 
EHR Pretrained
Figure 5: Multi-disease 5-year prediction. (a) We fine-tune Merlin for predicting chronic disease onset in otherwise healthy
patients within 5-years. (b) We compare Merlin to other baseline model variations fine-tuned for the same task. We find that with
both 100% and 10% of downstream training data, Merlin outperforms the other model variations. (c) Comparison of Merlin
chronic disease prediction performance to a model trained using only phenotypes (EHR Pretraining), an ImageNet I3D initialized
model, and a randomly initialized model. (d) An ablation study that measures the impact of various aspects of Merlin’s training
strategy. We find that training with EHR and radiology reports, using staged training (Stg.) or multi-task learning (MTL), and
training with radiology reports only (Rpt.), all outperform training with EHR only.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
a
c
b
lower thorax: normal. liver and biliary tree: normal. gallbladder: 
normal. spleen: normal. pancreas: normal. adrenal glands: 
normal. kidneys and ureters: normal. gastrointestinal tract: 
normal. peritoneal cavity: no free fluid. abdominal wall: normal. 
bladder: normal. uterus and ovaries: the endometrial stripe is 
thickened measuring 10 mm (3/297), there are multiple small 
follicles in both adnexa, right greater than left. vasculature: 
patent. lymph nodes: normal. musculoskeletal: normal.
Human Report
RadFM
Merlin-1
lower thorax: normal.  liver and biliary tree: normal. 
gallbladder: cholelithiasis. spleen: normal. pancreas: 
normal.  adrenal glands: normal. kidneys and ureters: likely 
phleboliths at the right hemipelvis. no renal or ureteral stones. no 
hydronephrosis. bowel: appendix is normal. peritoneal cavity: 
normal. abdominal wall: normal. bladder: normal. uterus and 
ovaries: normal. vasculature: patent. lymph nodes: normal. 
musculoskeletal: normal.
Green: 
correct, exists in both human, model reports
Purple: 
correct, exists in only human report
Blue:
correct, exists in only model report
Orange: 
mischaracterized positive finding for that anatomy
Pink:
false positive
Red:
false negative
Annotation Color Key
Merlin Report
•
Model misses cholelithiasis finding in gallbladder (red)
•
Human does not mention endometrial finding in uterus (red)
•
Both model and human miss focal thickening of the anterior 
myometrium, possibly indicating a small submucosal fibroid
•
Model invents a series/slice location (orange)
Takeaways
Post Hoc Radiologist 
Observations
Right: focal thickening of the 
anterior myometrium, 
possibly indicating a small 
submucosal fibroid
Bottom: cholelithiasis finding 
in gallbladder
Projection 
Generate a radiology 
report for liver###
Liver: ###</s>
Generated Report Section:
Liver normal.
Image 
Encoder
❆
RadLlama-7B
Figure 6: Radiology report generation. (a) To enable report generation, we extract the last hidden layer embeddings from Merlin
and modify the dimension of these embeddings using a projection layer. We generate the report section by section and therefore
also embed a report section prompt. The resulting vision and language tokens are used as input to a language model to generate a
report section. (b) We compare the performance of our model against RadFM, using 4 metrics, across each report section and the
full report. (c) We provide a densely annotated example of human and Merlin generated reports. We bold the report section
headers in the human and Merlin generated reports. We include "uterus and ovaries" in green, as Merlin needs to deduce the
correct pelvic anatomy.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
a
b
c
d
Ground Truth
nnUNet
Merlin
Image 
Encoder
Image 
Decoder🔥
🔥
Number of train 
examples:
10%: 28
100% 293
nnUNet 
Framework
nnUNet 
Framework
Stomach
Liver
Gallbladder
Left Kidney
Right 
Kidney
Spleen
T12 
Vertebrae
L1 
Vertebrae
L2 
Vertebrae
L3 
Vertebrae
L5 
Vertebrae
S1 
Vertebrae
Sacrum
Prostate
Urinary 
Bladder
Colon
Duodenum
Small 
Bowel
Pancreas
L4 
Vertebrae
Figure 7: 3D semantic segmentation. (a) To adapt Merlin and other architectures for segmentation, we add a decoder and skip
connections between the encoder and decoder. We conduct all segmentation experiments within the nnUNet framework. (b) We
compare model variations using average Dice score across 20 organs that appear in abdominal CT. We compare performance of
models trained using 100% of training cases and also simulate the data scarce regime with 10% of training cases. (c) We report
Dice scores for 20 organs across 5 model variations using 10% of training cases. (d) We qualitatively compare segmentations
between the ground truth labels, nnUNet, and Merlin with 10% of training cases. The red arrows indicate inconsistencies made
by the model relative to the ground truth. The same patient was sampled from the Total Segmentator51 test set.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
c)
Cutout + Rotate
Patchify
Input Abdominal CT
3D Vision-Only 
Encoder
Self-Supervised 
Heads
!!
!"
Inpainting
Contrastive
Rotation
"!
""
!!!"
= !#$%&#$'
+ !()$'*&+'
+ !,)'
3D Vision-Only SSL Pretraining
Image 
Encoder
Optimization 
Criteria
Findings-based disease classification task (Multihead Linear Probe) 
Zero-
shot 
Merlin
d)
a) 2D VLM Finetuning
b) 2D-to-3D Lifted VLM Finetuning
Random Axial 
Slice Selection
Image 
Encoder
Text 
Encoder
Multi-Task 
Learning: 
InfoNCE Loss
Abdominal CT
Abdominal CT
Image Encoder
Projector
Volume Decomposition
Slice Encoding
Slice Aggregation
Visual Embeddings
Text
Embeddings
Visual
Embeddings
Hepatic     
steatosis
Liver: 
normal
CT Reports
EHR Phenotypes Classification task (Linear Probe)
e)
All Phenotypes
All Phenotypes
Zero-shot 
Merlin
Figure 8: Alternative architecture experiments. The baselines, which include three 2D-to-3D lifted vision-language models, five
2D vision-language models, and two 3D vision-only models, are presented to evaluate different training strategies for the AbCT
dataset. The baselines serve as points of comparison against Merlin. Below, we illustrate the training procedure for the baseline
models. (a) 2D vision-language model (VLM) finetuning engages both the image and text encoders. Specifically, we adapted
the image encoder to process randomly selected axial slices from abdominal CT scans and trained the model in a multi-task
learning framework, jointly leveraging EHR phenotypes and radiology reports. (b) We finetuned the 2D-to-3D lifted VLM
by decomposing the abdominal CT volume into individual slices, which were processed through the image encoder. A neural
network slice projector then combined the slice-wise embeddings into a single embedding. (c) Vision-only SSL pretraining using
SwinUNETR and Resnet152 entails patchifying a large 3D volume into 3D patches and applying patch-level augmentations, with
inpainting, contrastive, and rotational losses. (d) Average F1 (left chart) and AUPRC (right chart) on 10% and 100% pretraining
data for the findings-based disease classification task. (e) Average AUROC (left chart) and AUPRC (right chart) across all 1692
phenotypes, the top quartile of 173 phenotypes, and the bottom quartile of 173 phenotypes across several baseline models. All
baseline models are trained using the phenotypes in the 100% pretraining dataset. The dashed lines denote random chance
performance. Note that Merlin is the best-performing model between these two tasks.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
Ascites
Appendicitis
Bowel 
Obstruction
Submucosal
Edema
Hydro-
nephrosis
Hiatal 
Hernia
Renal 
Hypodensity
Renal 
Cyst
Gallstones
Surgically Absent 
Gallbladder
Pancreatic 
Atrophy
Spleno-
megaly
Biliary Ductal 
Dilation
Hepato-
megaly
Hepatic 
Steatosis
Aortic Valve 
Calcification
Coronary 
Calcification
Cardio-
megaly
Pleural 
Effusion
Atelec-
tasis
Metastatic 
Disease
Anasarca
Osteopenia
Fracture
Abdominal 
Aortic 
Aneurysm
Lympha-
denopathy
Throm
-bosis
Atherosclerosis
Prostatomegaly
Free 
Air
Lower
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
/
and
Biliary
Tree
Thorax
Gallbladder
Kidneys
Gastrointestinal
Peritoneum
Pelvic
Vasculature
Musculoskeletal
Diffuse
Merlin (Internal Test Set)
Merlin (External Site #1)
2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP (External Site #2)
2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP (External Site #3)
2D-to-3D OpenCLIP (Internal Test Set)
2D-to-3D BiomedCLIP (External Site #1)
Merlin (External Site #3)
Merlin (External Site #2)
Ascites
Appendicitis
Bowel 
Obstruction
Submucosal
Edema
Hydro-
nephrosis
Hiatal 
Hernia
Renal 
Hypodensity
Renal 
Cyst
Gallstones
Surgically Absent 
Gallbladder
Pancreatic 
Atrophy
Spleno-
megaly
Biliary Ductal 
Dilation
Hepato-
megaly
Hepatic 
Steatosis
Aortic Valve 
Calcification
Coronary 
Calcification
Cardio-
megaly
Pleural 
Effusion
Atelec-
tasis
Metastatic 
Disease
Anasarca
Osteopenia
Fracture
Abdominal 
Aortic 
Aneurysm
Lympha-
denopathy
Throm
-bosis
Atherosclerosis
Prostatomegaly
Free 
Air
Lower
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
/
and
Biliary
Tree
Thorax
Gallbladder
Kidneys
Gastrointestinal
Peritoneum
Musculoskeletal
Diffuse
a) Merlin Test Set Performance 
b) Second Best Model Test Set Performance
c) Merlin Chest CT Performance Comparison
d) Merlin Chest CT Performance Comparison
Emphysema
Interstitial 
Thickening
Atelectasis
Glass 
Opacities
Consolidation
Nodules
Hiatal 
Hernia
Liver Mass
Hepatic 
Cysts
Fracture
Metastasis
Pericardial 
Effusion
Arthero-
sclerosis
Aortic 
Dissection
Lymphad-
enopathy
Pleural 
Thickening
Pneumothorax
Cavitations
Bronchi-
ectasis
Pulmonary 
Embolism
Pulmonary 
Edema
Aortic 
Aneurysm
Dilated 
Aorta
Pleural Effusion
CT-CLIP
CT-FM
Merlin
M3FM
Figure 9: External validation on abdominal and chest CTs. Merlin’s strong performance across 44,098 abdominal and chest CTs
from external sites. (a) Merlin’s performance across internal and three external sites across 30 findings assessed on abdominal CT
scans, where Merlin achieved the highest performance across all datasets. (b) Performance breakdown of the second-best model
at each site (selected by second-highest average F1) on the same abdominal CT findings. (c) We train a series of embedding
models on External Site #3’s chest CT dataset and benchmark them against recent chest CT foundation models. We here present
AUC performance comparison for each model across 24 diseases on External Site #3’s dataset. (d) Average AUC performance of
Merlin compared to recent Chest CT FMs on External Site #3’s dataset. Across all baselines, Merlin consistently achieves the
highest performance. We note that Merlin was trained exclusively on abdominal CT scans, while all other comparison models
were trained explicitly on chest CT scans. Despite this training anatomy discordance, Merlin exhibits the strongest performance
on Chest CT scans out of all comparison models.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
References
1 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Computed tomography (ct) exams.
https://data.oecd.org/healthcare/computed-tomography-ct-exams.htm.
2 Harvard Health. Radiation risk from medical imaging. https://www.health.harvard.edu/cancer/radiation-risk-
from-medical-imaging, Sep 2021.
3 Mateusz Winder, Aleksander Jerzy Owczarek, Jerzy Chudek, Joanna Pilch-Kowalczyk, and Jan Baron. Are we
overdoing it? changes in diagnostic imaging workload during the years 2010–2020 including the impact of the
sars-cov-2 pandemic. In Healthcare, volume 9, page 1557. MDPI, 2021.
4 Laura Schöckel, Gregor Jost, Peter Seidensticker, Philipp Lengsfeld, Petra Palkowitsch, and Hubertus Pietsch.
Developments in x-ray contrast media and the potential impact on computed tomography. Investigative radiology,
55(9):592–597, 2020.
5 Kalpana M. Kanal, Priscilla F. Butler, Debapriya Sengupta, Mythreyi Bhargavan-Chatfield, Laura P. Coombs, and
Richard L. Morin. U.s. diagnostic reference levels and achievable doses for 10 adult ct examinations. Radiology,
284(1):120–133, 2017. PMID: 28221093.
6 Amar Udare, Minu Agarwal, Kiret Dhindsa, Amer Alaref, Michael Patlas, Abdullah Alabousi, Yoan K Kagoma,
and Christian B van der Pol. Radiologist productivity analytics: factors impacting abdominal pelvic ct exam
reporting times. Journal of Digital Imaging, pages 1–11, 2022.
7 M Fernanda Bellolio, Herbert C Heien, Lindsey R Sangaralingham, Molly M Jeffery, Ronna L Campbell,
Daniel Cabrera, Nilay D Shah, and Erik P Hess. Increased computed tomography utilization in the emergency
department and its association with hospital admission. Western Journal of Emergency Medicine, 18(5):835,
2017.
8 Daniel Liu, John W Garrett, Matt H Lee, Ryan Zea, Ronald M Summers, and Perry J Pickhardt. Fully
automated ct-based adiposity assessment: comparison of the l1 and l3 vertebral levels for opportunistic prediction.
Abdominal Radiology, pages 1–9, 2022.
9 Matthew H Lee, Ryan Zea, John W Garrett, Peter M Graffy, Ronald M Summers, and Perry J Pickhardt.
Abdominal ct body composition thresholds using automated ai tools for predicting 10-year adverse outcomes.
Radiology, page 220574, 2022.
10 Ronan Thibault, Laurence Genton, and Claude Pichard. Body composition: why, when and for who? Clinical
nutrition, 31(4):435–447, 2012.
11 David DB Bates and Perry J Pickhardt. Ct-derived body composition assessment as a prognostic tool in oncologic
patients: From opportunistic research to artificial intelligence-based clinical implementation. American Journal
of Roentgenology, 2022.
12 Rebecca Kuriyan. Body composition techniques. The Indian journal of medical research, 148(5):648, 2018.
13 Louis Blankemeier, Isabel Gallegos, Juan Manuel Zambrano Chaves, David Maron, Alexander Sandhu, Fatima
Rodriguez, Daniel Rubin, Bhavik Patel, Marc Willis, Robert Boutin, et al. Opportunistic incidence prediction of
multiple chronic diseases from abdominal ct imaging using multi-task learning. In International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 309–318. Springer, 2022.
14 Juan M Zambrano Chaves, Andrew L Wentland, Arjun D Desai, Imon Banerjee, Gurkiran Kaur, Ramon Correa,
Robert D Boutin, David J Maron, Fatima Rodriguez, Alexander T Sandhu, et al. Opportunistic assessment of
ischemic heart disease risk using abdominopelvic computed tomography and medical record data: a multimodal
explainable artificial intelligence approach. Scientific Reports, 13(1):21034, 2023.
15 Imaging
Technology
News.
The
evolving
computed
tomography
market.
https://www.itnonline.com/article/evolving-computed-tomography-market, Mar 2024.
16 Vibhor Wadhwa, George Koshy Vilanilam, Avneesh Chhabra, Puneet Bhargava, Bhavya Rehani, Atif Zaheer,
Kedar Jambhekar, and Roopa Ram. A 15-year analysis of international medical graduates matching into
diagnostic radiology residency programs in the united states. Academic radiology, 29(1):137–143, 2022.
17 American College of Radiology. Acr job board. https://jobs.acr.org/jobseeker/search/results/, May 2024.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
18 U.S.
Bureau
of
Labor
Statistics.
Occupational
employment
and
wages,
may
2023.
https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes291224.htm, April 2024.
19 Chad Hudnall. Maximum capacity: Overloaded radiologists are grappling with solutions to a booming volume cri-
sis. https://www.acr.org/Practice-Management-Quality-Informatics/ACR-Bulletin/Articles/April-2024/Maximum-
Capacity.
20 James Milburn M. How will we solve our radiology workforce shortage?
https://www.acr.org/Practice-
Management-Quality-Informatics/ACR-Bulletin/Articles/March-2024/How-Will-We-Solve-Our-Radiology-
Workforce-Shortage.
21 Anika G Patel, Victor J Pizzitola, C Daniel Johnson, Nan Zhang, and Maitray D Patel. Radiologists make more
errors interpreting off-hours body ct studies during overnight assignments as compared with daytime assignments.
Radiology, 297(2):374–379, 2020.
22 Abi Rimmer. Radiologist shortage leaves patient care at risk, warns royal college. BMJ: British Medical Journal
(Online), 359, 2017.
23 Diego Ardila, Atilla P Kiraly, Sujeeth Bharadwaj, Bokyung Choi, Joshua J Reicher, Lily Peng, Daniel Tse,
Mozziyar Etemadi, Wenxing Ye, Greg Corrado, et al. End-to-end lung cancer screening with three-dimensional
deep learning on low-dose chest computed tomography. Nature medicine, 25(6):954–961, 2019.
24 D Eng, C Chute, N Khandwala, P Rajpurkar, J Long, S Shleifer, et al. Automated coronary calcium scoring
using deep learning with multicenter external validation. npj Digital Medicine, 2021.
25 Kai Cao, Yingda Xia, Jiawen Yao, Xu Han, Lukas Lambert, Tingting Zhang, Wei Tang, Gang Jin, Hui Jiang,
Xu Fang, et al. Large-scale pancreatic cancer detection via non-contrast ct and deep learning. Nature medicine,
29(12):3033–3043, 2023.
26 Yan-Ran Wang, Kai Yang, Yi Wen, Pengcheng Wang, Yuepeng Hu, Yongfan Lai, Yufeng Wang, Kankan
Zhao, Siyi Tang, Angela Zhang, et al. Screening and diagnosis of cardiovascular disease using artificial
intelligence-enabled cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Nature Medicine, pages 1–10, 2024.
27 Curtis P Langlotz. The future of ai and informatics in radiology: 10 predictions. Radiology, 309(1):e231114,
2023.
28 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Artificial intelligence and machine learning (ai/ml)-enabled medical
devices. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/software-medical-device-samd/artificial-intelligence-and-machine-
learning-aiml-enabled-medical-devices.
29 Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
30 Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi Cherti,
Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An open large-scale
dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:25278–25294, 2022.
31 David B Larson, David C Magnus, Matthew P Lungren, Nigam H Shah, and Curtis P Langlotz. Ethics of using
and sharing clinical imaging data for artificial intelligence: a proposed framework. Radiology, 295(3):675–682,
2020.
32 Zifeng Wang, Zhenbang Wu, Dinesh Agarwal, and Jimeng Sun. Medclip: Contrastive learning from unpaired
medical images and text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10163, 2022.
33 Sheng Zhang, Yanbo Xu, Naoto Usuyama, Jaspreet Bagga, Robert Tinn, Sam Preston, Rajesh Rao, Mu Wei,
Naveen Valluri, Cliff Wong, et al. Large-scale domain-specific pretraining for biomedical vision-language
processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915, 2023.
34 Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama, Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Naumann, Hoifung
Poon, and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00890, 2023.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
35 Michael Moor, Qian Huang, Shirley Wu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Cyril Zakka, Yash Dalmia, Eduardo Pontes Reis,
Pranav Rajpurkar, and Jure Leskovec. Med-flamingo: a multimodal medical few-shot learner. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15189, 2023.
36 Tao Tu, Shekoofeh Azizi, Danny Driess, Mike Schaekermann, Mohamed Amin, Pi-Chuan Chang, Andrew Carroll,
Chuck Lau, Ryutaro Tanno, Ira Ktena, et al. Towards generalist biomedical ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.14334,
2023.
37 Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Towards generalist foundation model
for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d and 3d medical data. 2023.
38 Omkar Thawkar, Abdelrahman Shaker, Sahal Shaji Mullappilly, Hisham Cholakkal, Rao Muhammad Anwer,
Salman Khan, Jorma Laaksonen, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Xraygpt: Chest radiographs summarization using
medical vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07971, 2023.
39 Shawn Xu, Lin Yang, Christopher Kelly, Marcin Sieniek, Timo Kohlberger, Martin Ma, Wei-Hung Weng,
Attila Kiraly, Sahar Kazemzadeh, Zakkai Melamed, et al. Elixr: Towards a general purpose x-ray artificial
intelligence system through alignment of large language models and radiology vision encoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.01317, 2023.
40 Pierre Chambon, Christian Bluethgen, Curtis P. Langlotz, and Akshay Chaudhari. Adapting pretrained vision-
language foundational models to medical imaging domains. 2022.
41 Christian Bluethgen, Pierre Chambon, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Rogier van der Sluijs, Małgorzata Połacin,
Juan Manuel Zambrano Chaves, Tanishq Mathew Abraham, Shivanshu Purohit, Curtis P. Langlotz, and Akshay S.
Chaudhari. A vision–language foundation model for the generation of realistic chest x-ray images. Nature
Biomedical Engineering, Aug 2024.
42 Zhihong Chen, Maya Varma, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Magdalini Paschali, Louis Blankemeier, Dave Van Veen,
Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Alaa Youssef, Joseph Paul Cohen, Eduardo Pontes Reis, et al. Chexagent: Towards
a foundation model for chest x-ray interpretation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12208, 2024.
43 Stephanie L Hyland, Shruthi Bannur, Kenza Bouzid, Daniel C Castro, Mercy Ranjit, Anton Schwaighofer,
Fernando Pérez-García, Valentina Salvatelli, Shaury Srivastav, Anja Thieme, et al. Maira-1: A specialised large
multimodal model for radiology report generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13668, 2023.
44 Shih-Cheng Huang, Tanay Kothari, Imon Banerjee, Chris Chute, Robyn L Ball, Norah Borus, Andrew Huang,
Bhavik N Patel, Pranav Rajpurkar, Jeremy Irvin, et al. Penet—a scalable deep-learning model for automated
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism using volumetric ct imaging. NPJ digital medicine, 3(1):61, 2020.
45 Matthew Christensen, Milos Vukadinovic, Neal Yuan, and David Ouyang. Vision–language foundation model
for echocardiogram interpretation. Nature Medicine, pages 1–8, 2024.
46 David B. Larson, Alex J. Towbin, Rebecca M. Pryor, and Lane F. Donnelly. Improving consistency in radiology
reporting through the use of department-wide standardized structured reporting. Radiology, 267(1):240–250,
2013. PMID: 23329657.
47 Nur Ahmed, Muntasir Wahed, and Neil C Thompson. The growing influence of industry in ai research. Science,
379(6635):884–886, 2023.
48 Sergei
Polevikov.
Med-gemini
by
google:
A
boon
for
researchers,
a
bane
for
doctors.
https://sergeiai.substack.com/p/googles-med-gemini-im-excited-and, 2024.
49 Scott L. Fleming, Alejandro Lozano, William J. Haberkorn, Jenelle A. Jindal, Eduardo P. Reis, Rahul Thapa,
Louis Blankemeier, Julian Z. Genkins, Ethan Steinberg, Ashwin Nayak, Birju S. Patel, Chia-Chun Chiang,
Alison Callahan, Zepeng Huo, Sergios Gatidis, Scott J. Adams, Oluseyi Fayanju, Shreya J. Shah, Thomas
Savage, Ethan Goh, Akshay S. Chaudhari, Nima Aghaeepour, Christopher Sharp, Michael A. Pfeffer, Percy
Liang, Jonathan H. Chen, Keith E. Morse, Emma P. Brunskill, Jason A. Fries, and Nigam H. Shah. Medalign: A
clinician-generated dataset for instruction following with electronic medical records. 2023.
50 Hans Liebl, David Schinz, Anjany Sekuboyina, Luca Malagutti, Maximilian T Löffler, Amirhossein Bayat,
Malek El Husseini, Giles Tetteh, Katharina Grau, Eva Niederreiter, et al. A computed tomography vertebral
segmentation dataset with anatomical variations and multi-vendor scanner data. Scientific data, 8(1):284, 2021.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
51 Jakob Wasserthal, Hanns-Christian Breit, Manfred T Meyer, Maurice Pradella, Daniel Hinck, Alexander W
Sauter, Tobias Heye, Daniel T Boll, Joshy Cyriac, Shan Yang, et al. Totalsegmentator: Robust segmentation of
104 anatomic structures in ct images. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 5(5), 2023.
52 Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
53 Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gordon, Christoph
Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image
learning. 2022.
54 Sheng Zhang, Yanbo Xu, Naoto Usuyama, Hanwen Xu, Jaspreet Bagga, Robert Tinn, Sam Preston, Rajesh Rao,
Mu Wei, Naveen Valluri, et al. Biomedclip: a multimodal biomedical foundation model pretrained from fifteen
million scientific image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915, 2023.
55 Maximilian T Löffler, Anjany Sekuboyina, Alina Jacob, Anna-Lena Grau, Andreas Scharr, Malek El Husseini,
Mareike Kallweit, Claus Zimmer, Thomas Baum, and Jan S Kirschke. A vertebral segmentation dataset with
fracture grading. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 2(4):e190138, 2020.
56 Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. In
proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6299–6308, 2017.
57 Joshua C Denny, Lisa Bastarache, Marylyn D Ritchie, Robert J Carroll, Raquel Zink, Jonathan D Mosley,
Julie R Field, Jill M Pulley, Andrea H Ramirez, Erica Bowton, et al. Systematic comparison of phenome-
wide association study of electronic medical record data and genome-wide association study data. Nature
biotechnology, 31(12):1102–1111, 2013.
58 Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie. A convnet
for the 2020s. 2022.
59 Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin
transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. 2021.
60 Yikuan Li, Ramsey M Wehbe, Faraz S Ahmad, Hanyin Wang, and Yuan Luo. Clinical-longformer and clinical-
bigbird: Transformers for long clinical sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11838, 2022.
61 Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Pierre Chambon, Christian Bluethgen, Emily Tsai, Omar Almusa, and Curtis P Lan-
glotz. Improving the factual correctness of radiology report generation with semantic rewards. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.12186, 2022.
62 Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating text
generation with bert. 2020.
63 Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out,
pages 74–81, 2004.
64 Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 311–318, 2002.
65 Fabian Isensee, Paul F Jaeger, Simon AA Kohl, Jens Petersen, and Klaus H Maier-Hein. nnu-net: a self-
configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature methods, 18(2):203–211,
2021.
66 Noel CF Codella, Ying Jin, Shrey Jain, Yu Gu, Ho Hin Lee, Asma Ben Abacha, Alberto Santamaria-Pang, Will
Guyman, Naiteek Sangani, Sheng Zhang, et al. Medimageinsight: An open-source embedding model for general
domain medical imaging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06542, 2024.
67 Lin Yang, Shawn Xu, Andrew Sellergren, Timo Kohlberger, Yuchen Zhou, Ira Ktena, Atilla Kiraly, Faruk
Ahmed, Farhad Hormozdiari, Tiam Jaroensri, Eric Wang, Ellery Wulczyn, Fayaz Jamil, Theo Guidroz, Chuck
Lau, Siyuan Qiao, Yun Liu, Akshay Goel, Kendall Park, Arnav Agharwal, Nick George, Yang Wang, Ryutaro
Tanno, David G. T. Barrett, Wei-Hung Weng, S. Sara Mahdavi, Khaled Saab, Tao Tu, Sreenivasa Raju Kalidindi,
Mozziyar Etemadi, Jorge Cuadros, Gregory Sorensen, Yossi Matias, Katherine Chou, Greg Corrado, Joelle
Barral, Shravya Shetty, David Fleet, S. M. Ali Eslami, Daniel Tse, Shruthi Prabhakara, Cory McLean, Dave
Steiner, Rory Pilgrim, Christopher Kelly, Shekoofeh Azizi, and Daniel Golden. Advancing multimodal medical
capabilities of gemini. 2024.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
68 Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Chenyu Wang, Furkan Almas, Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun,
Irem Doga, Omer Faruk Durugol, Weicheng Dai, Murong Xu, et al. Developing generalist foundation models
from a multimodal dataset for 3d computed tomography. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17834, 2024.
69 Chuang Niu, Qing Lyu, Christopher D Carothers, Parisa Kaviani, Josh Tan, Pingkun Yan, Mannudeep K Kalra,
Christopher T Whitlow, and Ge Wang. Medical multimodal multitask foundation model for lung cancer screening.
Nature Communications, 16(1):1523, 2025.
70 Suraj Pai, Ibrahim Hadzic, Dennis Bontempi, Keno Bressem, Benjamin H Kann, Andriy Fedorov, Ray-
mond H Mak, and Hugo JWL Aerts. Vision foundation models for computed tomography. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.09001, 2025.
71 Claudia Mello-Thoms and Carlos AB Mello. Clinical applications of artificial intelligence in radiology. The
British Journal of Radiology, 96(1150):20221031, 2023.
72 Deniz Alis, Toygar Tanyel, Emine Meltem, Mustafa Ege Seker, Delal Seker, Hakkı Muammer Karaka¸s, Ercan
Karaarslan, and ˙Ilkay Öksüz. Choosing the right artificial intelligence solutions for your radiology department:
key factors to consider. Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, 30(6):357, 2024.
73 Sheila V Kusnoor, Mallory N Blasingame, Annette M Williams, Spencer J DesAutels, Jing Su, and Nunzia Bet-
tinsoli Giuse. A narrative review of the impact of the transition to icd-10 and icd-10-cm/pcs. JAMIA open,
3(1):126–131, 2020.
74 Mark G Weiner. Point: is icd-10 diagnosis coding important in the era of big data? yes. Chest, 153(5):1093–1095,
2018.
75 Shih-Cheng Huang, Anuj Pareek, Malte Jensen, Matthew P Lungren, Serena Yeung, and Akshay S Chaudhari.
Self-supervised learning for medical image classification: a systematic review and implementation guidelines.
NPJ Digital Medicine, 6(1):74, 2023.
76 Yucheng Tang, Dong Yang, Wenqi Li, Holger R Roth, Bennett Landman, Daguang Xu, Vishwesh Nath, and Ali
Hatamizadeh. Self-supervised pre-training of swin transformers for 3d medical image analysis. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 20730–20740, 2022.
77 Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Yucheng Tang, Dong Yang, Ziyue Xu, Can Zhao, Wenqi Li, Vishal M. Patel, Bennett
Landman, Daguang Xu, Yufan He, and Vishwesh Nath. Disruptive autoencoders: Leveraging low-level features
for 3d medical image pre-training. 2023.
78 Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are
scalable vision learners. 2021.
79 Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Furkan Almas, Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Irem Dogan,
Muhammed Furkan Dasdelen, Bastian Wittmann, Enis Simsar, Mehmet Simsar, Emine Bensu Erdemir, Abdullah
Alanbay, Anjany Sekuboyina, Berkan Lafci, Mehmet K. Ozdemir, and Bjoern Menze. A foundation model
utilizing chest ct volumes and radiology reports for supervised-level zero-shot detection of abnormalities. 2024.
80 Michael Wornow, Rahul Thapa, Ethan Steinberg, Jason Fries, and Nigam Shah. Ehrshot: An ehr benchmark for
few-shot evaluation of foundation models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:67125–67137,
2023.
81 Hugo Laurençon, Léo Tronchon, Matthieu Cord, and Victor Sanh. What matters when building vision-language
models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02246, 2024.
82 Zhang Li, Biao Yang, Qiang Liu, Zhiyin Ma, Shuo Zhang, Jingxu Yang, Yabo Sun, Yuliang Liu, and Xiang Bai.
Monkey: Image resolution and text label are important things for large multi-modal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.06607, 2023.
83 Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
84 Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1597–1607. PMLR,
2020.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
85 Eduardo Pontes Reis, Louis Blankemeier, Juan Manuel Zambrano Chaves, Malte Engmann Kjeldskov Jensen,
Sally Yao, Cesar Augusto Madid Truyts, Marc H Willis, Scott Adams, Edson Amaro Jr, Robert D Boutin, et al.
Automated abdominal ct contrast phase detection using an interpretable and open-source artificial intelligence
algorithm. European Radiology, pages 1–8, 2024.
86 Cara Van Uden, Christian Bluethgen, Maayane Attias, Malgorzata Polacin, Haiwei Henry Guo, Neha Simha,
Rishi Raj, and Curtis Langlotz. Exploring the versatility of zero-shot clip for interstitial lung disease classification.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01111, 2023.
87 Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gordon, Christoph
Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2818–2829, 2023.
88 Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101,
2017.
89 James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu, Kieran
Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
90 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Chronic kidney disease in the united states, 2023.
https://www.cdc.gov/kidneydisease/publications-resources/ckd-national-facts.html, May 2023.
91 Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
By
the
numbers:
Diabetes
in
america.
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/health-equity/diabetes-by-the-numbers.html, Oct 2022.
92 Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
Facts
about
hypertension.
https://www.cdc.gov/bloodpressure/facts.htm, Jul 2023.
93 U.S.
Department
of
Health
and
Human
Services.
What
is
coronary
heart
disease?
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/coronary-heart-disease, Dec 2023.
94 Jing Gu, Robert Sanchez, Ankita Chauhan, Sergio Fazio, and Nathan Wong. Lipid treatment status and goal
attainment among patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in the united states: A 2019 update.
American journal of preventive cardiology, Mar 2022.
95 Nicole C Wright, Anne C Looker, Kenneth G Saag, Jeffrey R Curtis, Elizabeth S Delzell, Susan Randall, and Bess
Dawson-Hughes. The recent prevalence of osteoporosis and low bone mass in the united states based on bone
mineral density at the femoral neck or lumbar spine. Journal of bone and mineral research, 29(11):2520–2526,
2014.
96 Alistair EW Johnson, Lucas Bulgarelli, Lu Shen, Alvin Gayles, Ayad Shammout, Steven Horng, Tom J Pollard,
Sicheng Hao, Benjamin Moody, Brian Gow, et al. Mimic-iv, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset.
Scientific data, 10(1):1, 2023.
97 Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu
Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
98 Dave Van Veen, Cara Van Uden, Maayane Attias, Anuj Pareek, Christian Bluethgen, Malgorzata Polacin, Wah
Chiu, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Juan Zambrano Chaves, Curtis Langlotz, Akshay Chaudhari, and John Pauly.
RadAdapt: Radiology report summarization via lightweight domain adaptation of large language models. In Dina
Demner-fushman, Sophia Ananiadou, and Kevin Cohen, editors, The 22nd Workshop on Biomedical Natural
Language Processing and BioNLP Shared Tasks, pages 449–460, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
99 Dave Van Veen, Cara Van Uden, Louis Blankemeier, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Asad Aali, Christian Bluethgen,
Anuj Pareek, Malgorzata Polacin, William Collins, Neera Ahuja, Curtis P. Langlotz, Jason Hom, Sergios Gatidis,
John Pauly, and Akshay S. Chaudhari. Adapted large language models can outperform medical experts in clinical
text summarization. Nature Medicine, 2024.
100 Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image seg-
mentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international
conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
101 Ali Hatamizadeh, Yucheng Tang, Vishwesh Nath, Dong Yang, Andriy Myronenko, Bennett Landman, Holger R
Roth, and Daguang Xu. Unetr: Transformers for 3d medical image segmentation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, pages 574–584, 2022.
102 Chonghua Xue, Sahana S Kowshik, Diala Lteif, Shreyas Puducheri, Varuna H Jasodanand, Olivia T Zhou,
Anika S Walia, Osman B Guney, J Diana Zhang, Serena T Pham, et al. Ai-based differential diagnosis of
dementia etiologies on multimodal data. Nature Medicine, pages 1–13, 2024.
103 An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen
Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
104 Andrew Ross, Michael C Hughes, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Right for the Right Reasons: Training Differentiable
Models by Constraining their Explanations. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
105 Robert Geirhos, Carlos R. Medina Temme, Jonas Rauber, Heiko H. Schütt, Matthias Bethge, and Felix A.
Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence, nov 2020.
106 Joseph Paul Cohen, Tianshi Cao, Joseph D. Viviano, Chin-Wei Huang, Michael Fralick, Marzyeh Ghassemi,
Muhammad Mamdani, Russell Greiner, and Yoshua Bengio. Problems in the deployment of machine-learned
models in health care. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 2021.
107 Joseph Paul Cohen, Rupert Brooks, Sovann En, Evan Zucker, Anuj Pareek, Matthew P. Lungren, and Akshay
Chaudhari. Gifsplanation via Latent Shift: A Simple Autoencoder Approach to Counterfactual Generation for
Chest X-rays. Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2021.
108 Kenneth Clark, Bruce Vendt, Kirk Smith, John Freymann, Justin Kirby, Paul Koppel, Stephen Moore, Stanley
Phillips, David Maffitt, Michael Pringle, et al. The cancer imaging archive (tcia): maintaining and operating a
public information repository. Journal of digital imaging, 26:1045–1057, 2013.
109 Atilla Kiraly and Madeleine Traverse. Taking medical imaging embeddings 3D. Google Research Blog, October
2024. Available at: https://research.google/blog/taking-medical-imaging-embeddings-3d/.
110 Rogier Van der Sluijs, Nandita Bhaskhar, Daniel Rubin, Curtis Langlotz, and Akshay S Chaudhari. Exploring
image augmentations for siamese representation learning with chest x-rays. In Medical Imaging with Deep
Learning, pages 444–467. PMLR, 2024.
111 Zichao Li, Cihang Xie, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Scaling (down) clip: A comprehensive analysis of data,
architecture, and training strategies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08197, 2024.
112 Mohamed Hammad, Mohammed ElAffendi, Ahmed A Abd El-Latif, Abdelhamied A Ateya, Gauhar Ali, and
Pawel Plawiak. Explainable ai for lung cancer detection via a custom cnn on ct images. Scientific Reports,
15(1):12707, 2025.
113 Li-Guo Chen, Ping-An Wu, Hsing-Yang Tu, Ming-Huei Sheu, and Li-Chuan Huang. Variation in tube voltage
for pediatric neck 64vct: Effect on radiation dose and image quality. PLoS One, 16(11):e0259772, 2021.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
Supplementary Information
A Extended Methods
33
A.1
Dataset Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
B
Extended Results
35
B.1
Zero-shot Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
B.2
Phenotype Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B.3
Cross-modal Retrieval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
B.4
Future Disease Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
B.5
Report Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
C Additional Comparisons
44
C.1
Additional Alternative Architecture Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.2
Image data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
C.3
External Validation Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A
Extended Methods
A.1
Dataset Details
Split
2D Slices
CTs
Findings Tokens
ICD9 Codes
ICD10 Codes
Patients
Train
6,387,231
15,331
6,036,645
577,998
1,261,561
11,010
Validation
2,099,217
5,060
1,985,925
178,194
379,733
3,644
Test
2,142,061
5,137
2,029,001
197,821
399,986
3,667
Total
10,628,509
25,528
10,051,571
954,013
2,041,280
18,321
Table 1: Summary of pretraining dataset splits.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
Demographic
Patients (n = 18,321)
Value
Age
-
53.8±19.5
Gender
Female
10,254
55.97%
Male
8,065
44.02%
Self-Reported Race/Ethnicity
Non-Hispanic White
8,660
47.27%
Asian
2,673
14.59%
Black
952
5.20%
Hispanic White
515
2.81%
Pacific Islander
294
1.60%
Native American
65
0.35%
Unknown
5,127
27.98%
Patient Class
Inpatient
6,834
37.31%
Emergency Services
6,388
34.87%
Outpatient
2,959
16.16%
Observation
1,452
7.93%
Table 2: Internal dataset characteristics. The age value is provided as mean ± standard deviation. All other values are provided
as percentages of the total patients (n = 18,321).
Demographic
Patients (n = 5,804)
Value
Age
-
61.4±16.5
Gender
Female
2,982
51.38%
Male
2,822
48.62%
Self-Reported Race/Ethnicity
Non-Hispanic White
4,576
78.84%
Black
270
4.65%
Hispanic White
198
2.76%
Asian
87
1.50%
Native American
31
0.53%
Pacific Islander
4
0.07%
Unknown
602
10.37%
Table 3: External dataset characteristics. The age value is provided as mean ± standard deviation. All other values are provided
as percentages of the total patients (n = 5,804).
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
B
Extended Results
B.1
Zero-shot Classification
Method
Average F1 Score
OpenCLIP (Internal)
.276 [.262, .288]
BioMedCLIP (Internal)
.285 [.274, .295]
Merlin (Internal)
.741 [.727, .755]
Merlin (External)
.647 [.607, .678]
Merlin (VerSe)
.767 [.630, .867]
Table 4: Zero-shot classification. The internal and external numbers (first 4 rows) represent averages over the 30 findings for
the internal clinical dataset and the external clinical dataset respectively. The bottom row represents F1 score for zero-shot
classification of vertebral fractures on the VerSe dataset.
Init
Labels
Split
Average F1 Score
Text
I3D
Report
✓
.730 [.714, .744]
I3D
Staged
✗
.669 [.653, .683]
I3D
Staged
✓
.735 [.719, .748]
I3D
MTL
✗
.656 [.640, .671]
Rand
MTL
✓
.698 [.681, .711]
I3D
MTL
✓
.741 [.727, .755]
Table 5: Zero-shot classification ablation study. We measure zero-shot performance as we vary parameters of I3D versus random
initialization, staged training versus multi-task learning (MTL) with EHR and radiology reports, and training with the full
findings sections versus using radiology report splitting.
Scaling Law Experiments: We expand Figure 2d by providing a quantitative analysis of how increasing the pretrain-
ing dataset affects zero-shot performance. This analysis allows us to estimate the amount of pretraining data needed
to achieve a given zero-shot classification performance. The resulting power law is F1 = 0.458D0.0524, where D
represents the number of paired pretraining CT imaging and report data.
Additional 2D and 2D-to-3D Experiments: We expanded our analysis to present the top-k pooling results for
existing baseline models and included the zero-shot findings evaluation to encompass finetuned 2D and 2D-to-3D
lifted VLMs (Figure 10). We observed that top-k pooling does increase F1 score compared to mean-pooling.
We first evaluated off-the-shelf 2D BiomedCLIP and OpenCLIP models, without finetuning, by calculating average
F1 scores for top-k pooling (k=1, 10, 50). Our findings indicate that top-k pooling improves F1 scores for zero-shot
evaluation compared to average pooling, with performance decreasing as k increases (Figure 10a). For instance,
when comparing k=1 to the average (AVG), BiomedCLIP shows a 32.0% increase in F1 score, while OpenCLIP
shows a 29.0% increase in F1 score.
We repeated the top-k pooling experiments after 2D finetuning of BiomedCLIP, OpenCLIP, and ResnetCLIP (Figure
10b). Interestingly, after finetuning, pooling across averaged slices yielded the highest F1 scores. When comparing
average pooling F1 scores between the finetuned and non-finetuned versions of BiomedCLIP and OpenCLIP, we
observed that finetuning increased BiomedCLIP’s F1 score by 52.0%, whereas OpenCLIP’s F1 score decreased
by 2.1%. For instance, with the finetuned models, average pooling outperformed K=1 pooling, with BiomedCLIP
showing a 4.9% increase in F1 score, OpenCLIP a 5.0% increase, and ResnetCLIP a 22.0% increase. When
comparing the finetuned 2D baselines on average pooling, BiomedCLIP achieved the highest F1 score of 0.432 (95%
CI [0.419-0.443]), while OpenCLIP and ResnetCLIP demonstrated lower F1 scores of 0.272 (95% CI [0.260-0.283])
and 0.293 (95% CI [0.279-0.305]), respectively. This trend may be attributed to the 2D finetuning process, which
involved selecting a random slice for training. By minimizing reliance on specific slices, this approach reduces
potential advantages from pooling. To assess potential overfitting during 2D finetuning, we examined the model’s
performance across training epochs by tracking changes in zero-shot F1 score. The analysis revealed minimal signs
of overfitting, with training performance saturating around 30 epochs (Figure 10d).
Finally, we compared the 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs to Merlin on the zero-shot findings classification task. Among
the aggregation strategies, 2D-to-3D OpenCLIP achieved the highest F1 score of 0.632 (95% CI [0.613-0.647]),
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
followed by 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP with an F1 score of 0.614 (95% CI [0.595-0.623]) and BiomeCLIP with 0.587
(95% CI [0.568-0.604]) (Figure 10c). Despite these results, OpenCLIP’s F1 score was still 17.0% lower than that of
Merlin.
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 10: Zero-shot findings classification extended. (a) Top-k pooling on existing 2D BiomedCLIP and OpenCLIP baselines.
(b) Top-k pooling on 2D finetuned BiomedCLIP, OpenCLIP, and ResnetCLIP baselines. Finetuning involved training both the
image and text encoders following the strategy outlined in Figure 8b. (c) 2D-to-3D lifted VLM zero-shot evaluation. Merlin
tends to perform better on this task compared to baselines from other training paradigms. (d) BiomedCLIP’s F1 on zero-shot
findings classification task across training epochs.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
B.2
Phenotype Classification
Encoder
Init
Labels
Stem
All Phecodes
Upper Quartile
Lower Quartile
KSz/
N=691, Prev=3.1%
by Prevalence
by Prevalence
Stridez
Phecodes w/ AUC
N=173; Prev=8.7%
N=173, Prev=0.6%
AUROC
AUPRC
>0.85
>0.9
AUROC
AUPRC
AUROC
AUPRC
SwinUNETR
MAE
EHR
4/4
.736
.088
52
8
.734
.207
.738
.029
ConvNeXt-T
I3D
EHR
7/2
.768
.106
115
20
.765
.239
.764
.035
ConvNeXt-S
I3D
EHR
7/2
.761
.102
105
14
.760
.234
.750
.031
ConvNeXt-B
I3D
EHR
7/2
.773
.110
132
28
.768
.244
.766
.036
ConvNeXt-B*
I3D
EHR
3/2
.789
.131
180
46
.784
.270
.781
.052
ResNet50
I3D
EHR
3/1
.798
.137
226
72
.787
.280
.797
.049
ResNet152
I3D
EHR
7/2
.798
.135
221
65
.785
.272
.796
.050
↓
I3D
EHR
3/2
.798
.136
221
74
.788
.275
.792
.049
I3D
EHR
3/1
.801
.140
235
79
.789
.279
.801
.054
(Merlin)
I3D
MTL
3/1
.812
.142
259
93
.804
.290
.808
.050
Table 6: Phenotype classification. We only include phenotypes that have more than 20 positive examples in the test set in order
to ensure a meaningful measure of performance. * in ConvNext-B* indicates that instead of inflating the z dimension to a size
equal to the 2D kernel height and width of 7, the kernel is inflated to a depth of 3.
Init
Labels
Split
Stem
All Phecodes
Upper Quartile
Lower Quartile
Text
KSz/
N=691, Prev=3.1%
by Prevalence
by Prevalence
Stridez
Phecodes w/ AUC
N=173; Prev=8.7%
N=173, Prev=0.6%
AUROC
AUPRC
>0.85
>0.9
AUROC
AUPRC
AUROC
AUPRC
I3D
Staged
✗
3/1
.804
.145
240
84
.792
.287
.798
.056
I3D
Staged
✓
3/1
.807
.146
249
87
.795
.291
.801
.056
I3D
MTL
✗
3/1
.814
.153
267
103
.806
.302
.807
.058
Rand
MTL
✓
3/1
.786
.124
117
46
.778
.261
.779
.042
I3D
MTL
✓
3/1
.812
.142
259
93
.804
.290
.808
.050
Table 7: Phenotype classification ablation study. We perform ablation studies where we examine the impact of I3D initialization,
staged training versus multi-task learning (MTL) with EHR and radiology reports, and splitting the report text with every other
batch for finer grain contrastive learning.
Scaling Law Experiments: We expand Figure 3b by computing data scaling law curves and performing data analysis
to determine power laws. The resulting relationships are AUROC = 0.479D0.0568 and AUPRC = 0.0157x0.239,
where D represents the number of paired pretraining CT imaging and report data.
Counterfactual Analysis
Methods: Counterfactual analysis (Figure 3(e)) sought to evaluate whether a model is using expected features
during phenotype classification. Models can instead learn shortcuts from spurious correlations in the training
data,104,105,106 which are easier to learn compared to more subtle physiological features that the model should use.
We employ the Latent Shift approach107 for counterfactual generation. This method uses a latent variable model,
which represents the input image in a low dimensional space and reconstructs the image in its output. The gradient
of the Merlin prediction is passed back to the low-dimensional space, where the latent representation is modified
such that Merlin’s prediction decreases. This generates a modified image at the output of the latent variable model,
which can be observed. The latent variable model regularizes the change in pixels so that the image remains close
to the data manifold. The result of the Merlin counterfactual generation process is a new CT volume, which is
evaluated by observing how the classifier prediction changes and how the image features driving the classification
output are exaggerated or curtailed. We leverage this method to qualitatively verify that the features used during
classification are consistent with what we expect the model to have learned. For this evaluation, we identify pleural
effusion and splenomegaly as phenotypes with features that are well understood and can be observed in 2D slices.
We select the presented volumes such that the phenotype prediction is above the decision boundary determined by
AUROC curve analysis, to ensure that we are explaining a positive prediction.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
Results: In Figure 11e, we apply the latent shift counterfactual method107 to qualitatively investigate the image
features that Merlin uses to perform image classification. We examine an instance of “pleural effusion” (left) where
the effusion is localized to the left lung and is reduced in the counterfactual, indicating that Merlin is leveraging the
features we expect. We also examine “splenomegaly” classification (right). We observe that the size of the spleen is
reduced in the counterfactual relative to the original image, adding credence to the validity of imaging features that
Merlin uses for image classification.
EHR Phenotypes Task
Aside from the results provided in Section 2.7, 2D and 2D-to-3D VLMs lifted offered benefits in data scarce settings
with 10% training data.
2D VLM baselines: For the EHR phenotype classification task, the performance between finetuned and non-
finetuned OpenCLIP and BiomedCLIP models remained similar, with a slight 2.6% increase in AUROC and
4.9% increase in AUPRC observed for all phenotypes when finetuning was applied given 10% of the training data
(Figure 11b). In contrast, ResnetCLIP achieved a more significant 11.0% AUROC and 13.0% AUPRC improvement
compared to finetuned OpenCLIP and BiomedCLIP at 10% training data setting (Figure 11b). These results suggest
that finetuning provides a performance advantage in few-shot settings, specifically for 2D VLMs. This highlights
that while finetuning 2D VLMs can enhance performance in limited data settings, their overall capacity to capture
the volumetric data representations necessary for both tasks is limited.
2D-to-3D lifted VLM baselines: Larger performance gains were observed on the EHR phenotypes classification
task, with a 6.8% increase in AUROC and a 15.0% increase in AUPRC for all phenotypes in the 10% training data
setting (Figure 11b). These results suggest that, similar to 2D VLMs, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs offer advantages in
few-shot settings.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
Input
Counterfactual
Difference
Input
Counterfactual
Difference
Splenomegaly
Pleural Effusion
a)
b) EHR Phenotypes Classification task (Linear Probe)
All Phenotypes
All Phenotypes
All Phenotypes
All Phenotypes
Figure 11: Phenotype classification extended. (a) Counterfactual analyses of pleural effusion classification (left; image from
TCIA108) and splenomegaly classification (image from our internal test set). We annotate the zoomed in images by outlining the
pathologies. The red lines border pathologies in the original images. The blue lines border pathologies in the counterfactual
images. Counterfactual outlines are drawn over the original images with dotted lines and the original image outlines are also
drawn over the counterfactual images with dotted lines. This allows comparing the size and shape of the pathologies between
the original images and the counterfactuals, indicating that Merlin is indeed using appropriate features for image classification.
(b) Average AUROC (second row) and AUPRC (third row) at 10% and 100% pretraining on the EHR phenotype classification
task. Merlin pretraining results in consistently improved performance between the few-shot and fully-supervised data regimes
compared to other baselines.
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
B.3
Cross-modal Retrieval
Task
Method
Recall@1
Recall@8
N=32
N=64
N=128
N=32
N=64
N=128
Img→F
OpenCLIP
.030
.016
.009
.243
.125
.062
BioMedCLIP
.040
.021
.010
.298
.156
.083
Merlin
.780
.696
.608
.989
.968
.927
F→Img
OpenCLIP
.033
.017
.009
.250
.125
.061
BioMedCLIP
.044
.021
.012
.306
.156
.079
Merlin
.776
.687
.594
.988
.965
.920
Img→I
OpenCLIP
.030
.016
.010
.256
.128
.061
BioMedCLIP
.036
.017
.009
.273
.141
.073
Merlin
.352
.253
.174
.796
.663
.532
I→Img
OpenCLIP
.032
.017
.008
.252
.126
.064
BioMedCLIP
.046
.024
.012
.322
.169
.081
Merlin
.384
.277
.194
.854
.706
.564
Table 8: Cross-modality retrieval. We compare performance of OpenCLIP, BioMedCLIP, and Merlin across several settings:
retrieving the correct findings section given an image (Img →F), retrieving the correct image given a findings section (F →
Img), retrieving the correct impressions section given an image (Img →I), and retrieving the correct image given an impressions
section (I →Img). We perform retrieval within pools of sizes N=32, N=64, and N=128.
Task
Init
Labels
Split
Recall@1
Recall@8
Text
N=32
N=64
N=128
N=32
N=64
N=128
Img→F
I3D
Report
✓
.778
.692
.598
.989
.967
.921
I3D
Staged
✗
.654
.547
.449
.967
.920
.844
I3D
Staged
✓
.672
.561
.457
.972
.925
.848
I3D
MTL
✗
.812
.726
.639
.988
.969
.937
Rand
MTL
✓
.690
.583
.468
.978
.937
.867
I3D
MTL
✓
.780
.696
.608
.989
.968
.927
F→Img
I3D
Report
✓
.775
.686
.584
.991
.969
.921
I3D
Staged
✗
.646
.539
.434
.965
.913
.841
I3D
Staged
✓
.664
.555
.445
.970
.923
.841
I3D
MTL
✗
.801
.718
.626
.988
.968
.933
Rand
MTL
✓
.683
.571
.455
.980
.940
.869
I3D
MTL
✓
.776
.687
.594
.988
.965
.920
Img→I
I3D
Report
✓
.364
.265
.187
.812
.681
.549
I3D
Staged
✗
.307
.220
.159
.737
.590
.449
I3D
Staged
✓
.328
.228
.163
.780
.634
.500
I3D
MTL
✗
.372
.275
.196
.799
.667
.543
Rand
MTL
✓
.288
.202
.131
.740
.592
.453
I3D
MTL
✓
.352
.253
.174
.796
.663
.532
I→Img
I3D
Report
✓
.382
.274
.192
.850
.709
.574
I3D
Staged
✗
.324
.234
.161
.770
.616
.490
I3D
Staged
✓
.348
.246
.168
.811
.672
.523
I3D
MTL
✗
.400
.294
.216
.817
.698
.568
Rand
MTL
✓
.289
.200
.127
.779
.613
.460
I3D
MTL
✓
.384
.277
.194
.854
.706
.564
Table 9: Cross-modality retrieval ablation study. We compare retrieval performance across three axes of weight initializations,
methods for incorporating EHR and radiology reports into training, and splitting or using the full findings during training.
We extended the retrieval experiment presented in the main paper (Figure 4c) to include larger pools of data,
specifically N = 64, 256, and 1024 (Figure 12). Retrieval was performed on both the findings, which represent
in-distribution text consistent with the data used during model training, and the impressions, which are out-of-
distribution text and shorter in length (Figure 4b). We compared the performance of 2D VLM models and 2D-to-3D
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
lifted VLMs to Merlin. Notably, all models except for 2D BiomedCLIP and OpenCLIP would have encountered
the findings during training. These experiments offer insight into how medical VLMs may scale to larger clinical
retrieval tasks.
Results: Generally, as anticipated, we observe a decrease in retrieval performance across baselines as the pool size
increases, but the relative retrieval performance remains consistent (Figure 12). Merlin outperforms the 2D baselines,
showing orders of magnitude better performance, and is considerably more effective than the 2D-to-3D lifted
methods. Even for retrieval out of a large pool size of 1,024, Merlin achieves a recall of over 0.3, indicating that even
with over a thousand examples to choose from, the correct example is chosen one in three times. In comparison, the
2D baselines consistently perform poorly on the retrieval tasks. Among the 2D-to-3D lifted methods, BiomedCLIP
outperforms other lifted strategies for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution text and demonstrate slightly better
performance than random results.
In-Distribution Text
Out-of-Distribution Text
Figure 12: Retrieval extended. Retrieval performance across CLIP-style models with pools of 64, 256, and 1024. The findings
are in-distribution text, consistent with the data used during model training, while the impressions are out-of-distribution and
shorter in length (Main paper, Figure 4b). All models, except for 2D BiomedCLIP and OpenCLIP, would have encountered the
findings during training. Merlin maintains robust performance compared to other baselines.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
B.4
Future Disease Prediction
Encoder
Init
Labels
%T r
CKD
DM
HTN
IHD
CVD
OST
Average
10%
14/46
9/46
11/34
9/49
20/52
10/47
100%
90/513
80/474
111/404
69/518
136/504
68/527
Swin Transformer
-
-
10%
.46 [.40, .50]
.70 [.66, .75]
.43 [.39, .48]
.53 [.49, .57]
.53 [.50, .57]
.56 [.51, .61]
.54 [.52, .55]
ResNet152
-
-
10%
.53 [.48, .58]
.66 [.61, .71]
.60 [.55, .64]
.49 [.45, .54]
.58 [.54, .62]
.50 [.44, .56]
.56 [.54, .58]
↓
I3D
-
10%
.72 [.67, .76]
.72 [.67, .76]
.67 [.63, .71]
.67 [.63, .71]
.67 [.64, .71]
.66 [.61, .71]
.68 [.67, .70]
I3D
EHR
10%
.58 [.53, .63]
.64 [.59, .69]
.47 [.42, .51]
.75 [.71, .78]
.69 [.65, .72]
.62 [.57, .67]
.62 [.60, .64]
(Merlin)
I3D
MTL
10%
.74 [.70, .78]
.70 [.66, .75]
.69 [.65, .73]
.70 [.67, .74]
.73 [.69, .76]
.69 [.65, .73]
.71 [.69, .72]
Swin Transformer
-
-
100%
.55 [.50, .59]
.73 [.68, .77]
.61 [.57, .65]
.52 [.48, .56]
.54 [.49, .57]
.60 [.55, .66]
.59 [.57, .61]
ResNet152
-
-
100%
.63 [.58, .67]
.74 [.69, .78]
.65 [.61, .69]
.65 [.61, .69]
.57 [.54, .61]
.60 [.55, .66]
.64 [.62, .66]
↓
I3D
-
100%
.74 [.70, .77]
.74 [.70, .78]
.71 [.67, .75]
.68 [.64, .72]
.68 [.64, .71]
.74 [.69, .78]
.71 [.70, .73]
I3D
EHR
100%
.76 [.73, .80]
.72 [.68, .76]
.74 [.70, .77]
.74 [.70, .78]
.73 [.69, .76]
.68 [.64, .73]
.73 [.71, .74]
(Merlin)
I3D
MTL
100%
.77 [.74, .81]
.72 [.68, .76]
.75 [.72, .79]
.76 [.72, .79]
.74 [.71, .77]
.80 [.76, .84]
.76 [.74, .77]
Table 10: Multi-disease 5-year prediction. We fine-tune Merlin for 5-year disease prediction. All data used in this evaluation,
including train, val, and test splits, are held out from pretraining.
B.5
Report Generation
BLEU ↑
ROUGE-2 ↑
BERT ↑
RadGraph-F1 ↑
Section
RadFM Merlin RadFM Merlin RadFM Merlin RadFM
Merlin
Lower thorax
.001
.019
.070
.332
.406
.615
.020
.319
Liver and biliary tree
.001
.269
.025
.389
.328
.641
.080
.380
Gallbladder
.000
.006
.006
.632
.534
.851
.152
.721
Spleen
.000
.002
.004
.710
.382
.853
.283
.805
Pancreas
.000
.001
.010
.700
.447
.849
.091
.748
Adrenal glands
.006
.030
.067
.882
.490
.942
.106
.879
Kidneys and ureters
.005
.269
.040
.385
.368
.654
.091
.387
Gastrointestinal tract
.001
.013
.037
.152
.398
.531
.092
.167
Peritoneal cavity
.000
.206
.005
.390
.387
.702
.050
.335
Pelvic organs
.000
.233
.009
.358
.328
.656
.036
.432
Vasculature
.000
.026
.004
.485
.232
.748
.006
.548
Lymph nodes
.003
.023
.119
.601
.502
.775
.031
.542
Musculoskeletal
.001
.046
.018
.303
.449
.689
.008
.293
Full report
.000
.102
.011
.262
.224
.588
.008
.293
Table 11: Radiology report generation. We compare Merlin and RadFM for generating radiology report sections corresponding
to various anatomies, as well as the full findings.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
lower thorax: there is a small right pleural effusion with associated 
compressive atelectasis. liver and biliary tree: normal. gallbladder: surgically 
absent. spleen: normal. pancreas: postsurgical changes of whipple
procedure. the pancreaticojejunostomy is patent with no evidence of 
obstruction or leakage at this level. there are multiple fluid collections in the 
surgical bed, including a 3 x 2 cm collection adjacent to the hepaticojejunal 
anastomosis (4/107), and a 5 x 6 mm collection anterior to the sma (4/98). 
adrenal glands: normal. kidneys and ureters: normal. gastrointestinal tract: 
postsurgical changes of whipple procedure. no evidence for bowel 
obstruction or inflammation. peritoneal cavity: there is a small amount of 
free fluid in the pelvis. abdominal wall: postsurgical changes are seen along 
the anterior midline abdomen with mild subcutaneous stranding and foci of 
gas, likely related to recent surgery. bladder: normal. uterus and ovaries: 
surgically absent. vasculature: patent. lymph nodes: normal. 
musculoskeletal: normal.
Human Report
lower thorax: small bilateral pleural effusions with associated atelectasis /
consolidation. liver and biliary tree: stable subcentimeter hypodensity in 
segment 8 of liver , too small to characterize. mild periportal edema likely 
postsurgical. new linear hypoattenuating area within lateral segment of left 
lobe , most likely related to retraction. gallbladder: surgically absent. 
spleen: normal. pancreas: normal. adrenal glands: normal. kidneys and 
ureters: normal. bowel: status post recent whipple procedure. no 
intrahepatic ductal dilatation or pancreatic ductal dilatation. stomach does 
not appear significantly distended. mild wall thickening of 
gastrojejunostomy due to lack of distention or postoperative edema. 
postoperative stranding in the resection bed, tracking along sma and smv. 
peritoneal cavity: 8.5 x 1.6 x 4.9 cm fluid collection in right anterior 
pararenal space, with attenuation compatible with hematoma. a small 
amount of nonspecific free fluid is also present in the pelvis. abdominal 
wall: mild diffuse subcutaneous stranding along bilateral flanks. bladder: 
small amount of air in the bladder likely due to recent catheterization. uterus 
and ovaries: redemonstration of a fibroid originating from the fundus of the 
uterus. vasculature: mild narrowing of portosplenic confluence and proximal 
smv, likely secondary to postop edema. hepatic artery is patent. lymph 
nodes: a few of left paraaortic subcentimeter lymph nodes are mildly 
increased in size, most likely reactive. musculoskeletal: normal.
Green: 
correct, exists in both human, model reports
Purple: 
correct, exists in only human report
Blue:
correct, exists in only model report
Orange: 
mischaracterized positive finding for that anatomy
Pink:
false positive
Red:
false negative
Annotation Color Key
Merlin Report
•
Human incorrectly labels the pancreas as normal (red). Later in the 
report, this was described correctly, indicating the human overlooked a 
default field in the template,
•
Model identifies only one side of bilateral pleural effusions (orange)
•
Model describes diffuse fluid below the anastomosis site as a 
“collection,” which is a slight mischaracterization as the fluid is not 
encapsulated (orange)
Takeaways
lower thorax: no significant pulmonary, pleural, or mediastinal 
abnormality is seen in the visualized portions of the thorax. liver: normal. 
gallbladder/bile ducts: the common bile duct is mildly prominent 
measuring up to 8 mm, likely related to patient's age and 
postcholecystectomy state. no evidence of choledocholithiasis or 
intrahepatic biliary dilatation. gallbladder: appears normal. spleen: 
normal. pancreas: no evidence of masses or calcifications in the 
pancreas. no pancreatic ductal dilatation. genitourinary: there is a 1 cm 
cystic lesion within the left kidney, likely representing a simple renal cyst
(series 3 image 207). otherwise, the kidneys are unremarkable without 
evidence of enhancing renal masses, nephrolithiasis, or hydronephrosis. 
the bladder appears normal. gastrointestinal: the stomach and small 
bowel appear normal. the colon shows mild diverticulitis. adrenal glands: 
normal. kidneys and ureters: the kidneys enhance homogeneously. no 
focal renal lesions. no hydronephrosis or nephroureterolithiasis. bowel: 
no evidence of obstruction. the appendix is normal in appearance. 
peritoneal cavity: no ascites, pneumoperitoneum, or focal intra-
abdominal collections. abdominal wall: unremarkable. pelvis: the liver is 
normal without evidence of enhancing masses or biliary dilatation. a 1 cm 
low attenuating lesion is noted in segment ivb (image 97, series 4), which 
is too small to characterize but likely represents a simple cyst. the 
hepatic and portal veins are patent. evaluation of the gallbladder 
demonstrates no evidence of stones, wall thickening, or pericholecystic 
fluid. the spleen appears normal in size. no evidence of splenic masses. 
evaluation the pancreas demonstrates. vasculature: the abdominal aorta 
is normal in caliber. no atherosclerotic calcifications. lymph nodes: no 
enlarged retroperitoneal, mesenteric, pelvic or inguinal lymph nodes. 
musculoskeletal: no aggressive osseous lesion is identified in the 
abdomen or pelvis.
Human Report
lower thorax: normal. liver and biliary tree: normal morphology, contour 
and size of liver. stable appearance of focal, subcentimeter hypodensity in 
the posterior right hepatic lobe ( series 3 / 50 ), too small to characterize 
but statistically favored to represent a cyst. gallbladder: normal. spleen: 
normal. pancreas: normal. adrenal glands: normal. kidneys and ureters: 
normal morphology with bilateral kidneys. normal parenchymal 
enhancement and excretion. focal dilatation of the mid right ureter, 
without obstructing lesion or calculus seen. no ureteral enhancement. 
gastrointestinal tract: normal caliber of the small and large bowel . no 
bowel wall thickening . normal appearance of the appendix ( series 2 / 203 
; 301 / 61 ). peritoneal cavity: no free fluid. abdominal wall: normal. 
bladder: mild, asymmetric thickening of the bladder wall anteriorly. 
prostate and seminal vesicles: normal. vasculature: patent. lymph nodes: 
normal. musculoskeletal: stable appearance of sclerotic focus in the left 
femoral head and right femoral neck ( series 3/286 ; 3/322 ), likely 
representing a bone island.
Merlin Report
•
The model report (274 words) is considerably longer than the human 
report (154 words).
•
Model correctly describes the gallbladder appearance as normal 
(green), but this logically contradicts the earlier, false statement of 
“postcholecystectomy” (pink).
•
Model contains two sections for kidneys which logically contradict: the 
genitourinary section falsely describes a cyst (pink); the kidneys and 
ureters section describes no finding (green, orange).
Takeaways
b
a
c
Figure 13: Radiology report generation. (a) As shown in the annotation color key, we annotate individual phrases to be correct,
mischaracterized, false positive, or false negative. (b - c) We provide dense annotations of two sets of human and Merlin
generated reports.
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
C
Additional Comparisons
C.1
Additional Alternative Architecture Comparison
Full-Finetuning:
We extend the results from Figure 8 and present full fine-tuning to enable a fair comparison
between Merlin and alternative architecture baselines.
Methods: Here, we describe the evaluation tasks, which involve finetuning both the image encoder and classification
heads. For the 3D vision-only models, the embedding dimensions were 768 for SwinUNETR and 2048 for I3D
Resnet152. For the 2D and the 2D-to-3D VLMs, the embedding dimensions were 768 for BiomedCLIP, 2048 for
ResnetCLIP, and 1024 for OpenCLIP.
Findings-based disease classification task: The findings-based disease classification task was adapted from the
zero-shot findings classification task (Section 4.4), where the 30 findings originally used for zero-shot evaluation
were reformulated for supervised learning. We parsed the radiology reports and categorized each finding as positive,
negative, or missing from the report. While most conventional strategies involve discarding missing labels during
training, we adopted a more inclusive strategy to use all our data. We framed the task as a multilabel classification
task, introducing thirty separate binary heads, one for each finding. We masked the loss for subjects missing a
specific finding before backpropogation.102,13 This approach standardizes the finetuning of image encoders across
various models: vision-only foundation models, 2D vision-language models, 2D finetuned vision-language models,
2D-to-3D lifted vision-language models, and Merlin. We evaluated the performance of these baselines using 10%
and 100% of the training data over 10 epochs for thoroughness.
Phenotype classification The EHR phenotype classification task (Section 4.4) required minimal modification to the
model architectures, by including linear classification heads for the 1692 phenotype tasks. For the vision-language
models finetuned with MTL, the EHR linear layer from the MTL pretraining was already included, allowing for
straightforward finetuning. For the vision-only and original 2D vision-language models (without finetuning), we
appended a linear classification head to the image encoder. Similar to the findings-based disease classification task,
we fully finetuned (image encoder plus linear classification heads) the models on 10% and 100% of the training data
to assess classification performance across different dataset sizes.
Results: 2D VLMs: The 2D VLMs demonstrated relatively consistent performance between both finetuning and no
finetuning scenarios. Specifically, finetuned OpenCLIP and BiomedCLIP exhibited an increase of 6.8% in AUPRC
with relatively consistent F1 scores compared to their non-finetuned counterparts on the findings-based disease
classification task at the 100% training data setting (Figure 14a). Similarly, finetuned 2D ResnetCLIP yielded similar
performance to the other finetuned models. For example, when trained on 100% of the data for the findings-based
disease classification task, the model achieved an F1 score of 0.570 (95% CI [0.505-0.631]), which was comparable
to OpenCLIP (0.576, 95% CI [0.511-0.636]) and BiomedCLIP (0.556, 95% CI [0.496-0.620]). However, 2D VLMs
underperformed compared to Merlin, with a 8.1% lower F1 score for findings-based disease classification and 9.4%
lower AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task in the 100% training data setting (Figure 14a-b).
2D-to-3D lifted VLMs: 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs demonstrated comparable performance to their 2D VLM baselines,
with some improvements in specific scenarios. On the findings-based disease classification task, 2D-to-3D lifted
VLMs performed similarly to their finetuned 2D VLM counterparts, with a 3.2% increase in F1 score in the 10%
training data setting and a 1.4% increase in AUPRC in the 100% training data setting (Figure 14a). Performance
among the 2D-to-3D lifted models varied. For instance, 2D-to-3D OpenCLIP achieved a 3.4% increase in F1 score
and a 19.0% increase in AUPRC for the findings-based disease classification task compared to the other 2D-to-3D
baselines (Figure 14a). In contrast, 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP outperformed the other 2D-to-3D VLMs on the EHR
phenotypes classification task, showing a 4.5% increase in AUROC and a 10.0% increase in AUPRC.
Despite these improvements, 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs underperformed relative to Merlin. Specifically, Merlin had
18.0% higher F1 scores on the findings-based disease classification task and a 12.0% higher AUROC on the EHR
phenotype classification task compared to the 2D-to-3D lifted VLMs (Figure 14a-b).
3D vision-only models: 3D models trained from scratch or with SSL pretraining had a 8.1% decrease in F1 score on
the findings-based disease classification task and a 5.3% decrease in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task compared
to Merlin in the 100% training data setting (Figure 14a-b). Among the 3D vision-only baselines, SwinUNETR
underperformed 3D Resnet, with a 16.0% decrease in F1 score on the findings-based disease classification task
and a 9.1% decrease in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes task. SSL pretraining modestly improved 3D Resnet
performance, increasing the F1 score by 1.8% and AUPRC by 3.1% on the findings-based disease classification task
(Figure 14a-b). However, these 3D Resnet models underperformed relative to Merlin, with a 3.5% decrease in F1
score on the findings-based disease classification task and a 17.0% decrease in AUPRC on the EHR phenotypes task
(Figure 14a-b). Although 3D vision-only models outperformed the 2D and 2D-to-3D VLMs with a 5.7% increase in
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
F1 score on the findings-based disease classification task and 4.8% increase in AUROC on the EHR phenotypes
task, Merlin still achieved the best quantitative performance across all tasks (Figure 14a-b).
a) Findings-based disease classification task 
b) EHR Phenotypes Classification task
Zero-
shot 
Merlin
Zero-shot 
Merlin
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Figure 14: Alternative Architecture Baselines compared to Merlin (Full Finetuning). Alternative architecture baselines versus
Merlin, where each baselines is fully finetuned (image encoder plus classification head). Average F1 (left chart) and AUPRC
(right chart) on 10% and 100% pretraining data for the findings-based disease classification task. (b) Average AUROC (second
row) and AUPRC (third row) at 10% and 100% pretraining on the EHR phenotype classification task. Merlin pretraining results
in consistently improved performance between the few-shot and fully-supervised data regimes compared to other baselines.
MLP Experiments: We further evaluate the embeddings from a recent 3D CT embedding model from Google.109
We find that Merlin’s embeddings are more information-rich compared to those produced by the Google 3D CT
vision-language embedding model using multi-layer perceptrons (Figure 15).
Method (Google CT Pre-processing): We further compare Merlin with Google CT Foundation on the findings-based
disease and EHR phenotype classification task. CT Foundation is a recently released foundation model that generates
embeddings from CT volumes.67 We do note that the CT Foundation model presents challenges due to limited
reproducibility: the model weights, training methodology, and data pre-processing details have not been disclosed.
Interaction with the model is restricted to an API, which outputs a 1,408-dimensional 32-bit embedding vector for
each CT volume. To use the API, we provide Google with a Google Cloud Bucket containing our 25,528 NIfTI
files, and the API returns the corresponding 1,408-dimensional vectors as pickle files. We agree that there is limited
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
methodological detail and differences in preprocessing could influence the results. To enable a fair comparison,
we further processed each abdominal CT scan (a total of 25,528 volumes) to generate 2048-dimensional Merlin
embedding vectors. Embeddings from both models (Merlin and Google CT Foundation) were then used as inputs to
lightweight multi-layer perceptrons for findings-based disease and EHR phenotype classification tasks, with all
hyperparameters kept consistent during evaluation. This approach allowed us to assess which 3D CT foundation
model produces the most information-rich embedding vectors for these tasks.
Results: Compared to the Google CT Foundation, Merlin had 4.1% higher F1 score and a 5.8% higher AUPRC for
the findings-based disease classification task (Figure 15). Both models depicted similar performance in the 10%
training data setting for this tsk. On the EHR phenotyping task in the 100% training data setting, Merlin had a 3.0%
higher AUROC and a 13.0% higher AUPRC than Google CT Foundation (Figure 15b). In the 10% training data
setting, Merlin had 14.7% higher AUROC and a 79.0% higher AUPRC. Overall, while Google CT Foundation
served as a strong baseline, Merlin provided higher-quality embeddings for these evaluation tasks.
a) Findings-based disease classification task 
b) EHR Phenotypes Classification task
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Phenotypes
Figure 15: MLP Embedding Comparison. Comparison of 3D embeddings between Google CT Foundation and Merlin. To
clarify, the evaluation models were trained using embeddings only, as Google CT Foundation produces embeddings exclusively.
Lightweight multi-layer perceptrons were then trained for both classification tasks. All hyperparameters were kept consistent
during training. (a) Average F1 (left chart) and AUPRC (right chart) on 10% and 100% training data for the findings-based
disease classification task. (b) Average AUROC (second row) and AUPRC (third row) at 10% and 100% pretraining.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
MedImageInsight Processing Details:
MedImageInsight (Microsoft) is a multimodal CLIP-style model that
leverages the DaViT architecture with UniCL as its objective function, providing embeddings for both medical
images and text.66 Trained on 3D medical imaging data, including abdominal CT scans, this model produces image
and text representations suitable for downstream tasks. To evaluate its performance on the Merlin internal test
set, we applied MedImageInsight’s image embeddings to zero-shot findings classification and EHR phenotype
prediction. Following the Merlin preprocessing pipeline, abdominal CT scans were resampled to 1.5 × 1.5 × 3 mm
voxel spacing, reoriented to RAS, clipped to a Hounsfield range of –1000 to 1000, and center-cropped to 224 × 224
× 160 voxels. Each volume was decomposed into 160 axial slices, converted to PNG images, and processed by
MedImageInsight. Slice-level embeddings were then aggregated using a median-based strategy to obtain a single
representation per CT volume (see Methods66).
47

===== PAGE 48 =====
C.2
Image data augmentation
We evaluated the impact of image data augmentation for vision-language pretraining. We observed that augmentation
strategies significantly reduced performance compared to Merlin, which was trained without data augmentation.
Methods: We explored two variants of image data augmentation strategies that attempted to preserve the original
image signal - one weak and one strong, inspired by nnUNet65 and prior work on optimal augmentation strategies
for medical imaging.110 Below, we list the augmentations used and their probability of being applied per instance
(P). The weak image augmentation involved: zoom scaling between 0.8 and 1.2 (P = 0.16), Gaussian noise
addition with a standard deviation of up to 0.1 (P = 0.1), and gamma-based intensity adjustments ranging from
0.7 to 1.5 (P = 0.15). The more aggressive augmentations included: rotations up to 15 degrees (P = 0.16), zoom
scaling between 0.6 and 1.4 (P = 0.16), Gaussian noise addition with a standard deviation of up to 0.3 (P = 0.1),
gamma-based intensity adjustments ranging from 0.7 to 1.5 (P = 0.15), and horizontal flips (P = 0.5). These
models were trained from scratch, initialized with inflated Imagenet weights, and run for 100 epochs (same as
Merlin).
Results: We evaluated the image data-augmented models on the zero-shot findings classification task and observed
that augmentation significantly reduced performance compared to Merlin trained without data augmentation (Figure
16a). Specifically, for many diseases in the findings task, the use of augmentation strategies appeared to progressively
degrade performance (Figure 16b). This result may initially seem counterintuitive, as existing literature suggests that
image data augmentation improves CLIP performance.111 However, the same study also emphasized the importance
of training CLIP models on high-quality datasets, showing that training on 60% of the highest-quality data yielded
nearly equivalent performance to using the full dataset. It is possible that CLIP-style training with abdominal CT
images and radiology reports requires high-quality data that maintains precise image-text alignment. Image data
augmentations may inadvertently alter critical elements of the abdominal CT images, causing misalignment with
the corresponding radiology reports. This misalignment likely leads the model to learn noise rather than meaningful
signal, reducing the effectiveness of CLIP pretraining (Figure 16). Furthermore, while data augmentations can
introduce robustness in models trained on larger datasets commonly found in natural imaging, our comparatively
smaller-scale medical training dataset may amplify the noise introduced by these augmentations rather than
improving robustness. Scaling to larger datasets could mitigate this issue, potentially enhancing the benefits of
augmentations and improving the overall effectiveness of CLIP pretraining. We therefore find that Merlin, trained
without any image data augmentation, still outperforms variants using augmentation strategies. We hope that our
open source dataset can inspire additional work on optimal augmentations and training strategies in the future.
C.3
External Validation Experiments
We expand on our external validation experiments (Section 2.8), providing a summary of results and an explanation
for observed discrepancies in dataset distributions.
Zero-shot findings classification: We evaluate Merlin on the zero-shot findings classification task using abdominal
CT scans from four separate datasets (Figure 17).
Specifically, we observe:
• Internal test set: Merlin outperforms the second-best model, 2D-to-3D OpenCLIP, by 17.2% (Figure
17a).
• Out-of-state site #1: All 2D-to-3D models experienced a 25.5% drop in external performance compared
to the internal test set. Merlin on the other hand, had a drop of 12.4%. Additionally, Merlin outperformed
the second-best model, 2D-to-3D BiomedCLIP, by 34.4% (Figure 17b).
• In-state site #2: Merlin outperforms the second-best model, 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP, by 15.7% (Figure
17c).
• In-state site #3: Merlin outperforms the second-best model, 2D-to-3D ResnetCLIP, by 8.89% (Figure
17d).
External dataset distribution shifts: We summarize dataset characteristics in Table 12. Across all external sites, the
mean patient age is higher than in our internal test set, which may contribute to performance differences given
that older populations can exhibit distinct disease prevalence and imaging characteristics. These cohorts exhibited
differences in demographics and acquisition parameters, particularly age distributions, slice thickness, scanner
manufacturer, and radiologist reporting patterns. This diversity enables us to assess Merlin’s ability to generalize
across varied clinical settings.
48

===== PAGE 49 =====
b)
Ascites
Appendicitis
Bowel 
Obstruction
Submucosal
Edema
Hydro-
nephrosis
Hiatal 
Hernia
Renal 
Hypodensity
Renal 
Cyst
Gallstones
Surgically Absent 
Gallbladder
Pancreatic 
Atrophy
Splenomegaly
Biliary Ductal 
Dilation
Hepatomegaly
Hepatic 
Steatosis
Aortic Valve 
Calcification
Coronary 
Calcification
Cardio-
megaly
Pleural 
Effusion
Atelec-
tasis
Metastatic 
Disease
Anasarca
Osteopenia
Fracture
Abdominal 
Aortic 
Aneurysm
Lympha-
denopathy
Thrombosis
Atherosclerosis
Prostatomegaly
Free 
Air
Lower
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
/
and
Biliary
Tree
Thorax
Gallbladder
Kidneys
Gastrointestinal
Peritoneum
Pelvic
Vasculature
Musculoskeletal
Diffuse
a)
Image Augmentation 
(weak)
Image Augmentation 
(strong)
Merlin (no Image 
Augmentation)
Figure 16: Image data augmentation experiments. Image data augmentation experiments on zero-shot findings classification task.
(a) Average F1 score for models trained with Merlin’s architecture (I3D Resnet152; Clinical Longformer) with weak versus
strong image data augmentation. Increased augmentation results in reduced performance. (b) Performance on models trained
with various image data augmentation strategies, including Merlin, across 30 findings assessed on abdominal CT scans.
We note that External Site #1 is an out-of-state dataset exhibiting distribution shifts not only at the patient, scanner,
and imaging protocol level, but also in how radiologists interpret and report findings. In our training dataset, negative
49

===== PAGE 50 =====
findings are documented using a standardized template across all radiologists, ensuring consistent phrasing. In
contrast, radiologists in the external test set employ varied styles and terminology when reporting negative cases.
Consequently, report text for normal organs is more homogeneous in the training data than in the external dataset.
The slight performance differences observed on this external set are likely due to such reporting-level variations.
Additionally, we observe that most CTs from External Site #1 have slice thicknesses greater than 3 mm, which
substantially degrades image quality by reducing spatial resolution and obscuring anatomical details critical for
accurate findings detection. We also observe that every other alternative architecture baseline performs worse
than random chance on Site #1’s dataset. Since all baselines shared identical pretraining, including the Clinical
Longformer60 text encoder, Merlin’s superior performance can be attributed to its full 3D image encoder. The
consistent, substantial gains demonstrate the quality of the Merlin model.
For External site #2, performance differences to the internal test set are primarily driven by scanner-level variation.
From Table 12, we observe that the internal test set has an approximately 60/40 split between GE Healthcare
and Siemens scanners, whereas 95% of scans in Site #2 were acquired by Canon scanners. Different scanner
manufacturers can introduce variations in reconstruction algorithms, resolution, noise levels, and contrast profiles.112
Such differences can alter CT scan appearance, making it more challenging for Merlin to align image and text
representations under these distribution shifts.
For External Site #3, we observe both protocol-level differences, particularly for kVp, and scaner-level differences.
In the internal test set, most scans use either 100 or 120 kVp, whereas in External Site #3, nearly all scans are
acquired at 120 kVp (Table 12). Additionally, nearly all scanners at External Site #3 are GE Healthcare, compared
to a more balanced distribution of GE Healthcare and Siemens scanners in the internal test set (Table 12). Variations
in kVp can influence image noise and exposure, especially in dense anatomical regions.113
Dataset Characteristics
Train / Validation Set
Internal Test Set
Site #1
Site #2
Site #3
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
Abdominal CTs
20,332
–
5,137
–
6,997
–
25,986
–
4,872
–
Age (mean)
54.1 ± 18.9
–
54.5 ± 19.1
–
62.3 ± 14.5
–
60.3 ± 19.3
–
60.3 ± 16.7
–
Sex
Female
11,377
56.0
2,927
57.0
3,631
52.1
14,132
54.4
2,454
50.4
Male
8,953
44.0
2,210
43.0
3,364
48.2
11,854
45.6
2,418
49.6
Other
2
0.00
0
0.00
1
0.00
0
0.00
1
0.00
kVp Count
100 kVp
7,901
38.9
1,975
38.4
636
9.08
782
3.00
73
1.50
120 kVp
11,501
56.5
2,911
56.7
4184
59.8
24,779
95.4
4,459
91.5
140 kVp
480
2.36
134
2.60
2155
30.8
2
0.00
268
5.50
Other
450
2.20
117
2.30
22
0.00
423
1.63
72
1.47
Slice thickness
1-3mm
19,904
99.9
4,995
99.9
132
1.88
25,926
99.7
4,218
94.5
>3mm
18
0.00
4
0.00
6,865
98.1
60
0.00
247
5.53
Tube current (mA)
440
440
–
161
–
220
–
329
–
Scanner Manufacturer
GE Healthcare
12,399
61.0
3,119
60.9
6,971
99.6
1,104
4.25
4,458
91.5
Canon
0
0.00
0
0.00
26
0.00
24,881
95.7
0
0.00
Siemens
7,926
39.0
2,001
39.1
0
0.00
1
0.00
241
5.00
Philips
2
0.00
1
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.00
173
3.50
Table 12: Summary of Dataset Characteristics across internal and external sites on abdominal CTs. This includes the number of
abdominal CTs, age, sex distribution, CT scan parameters (kVp, slice thickness, mean tube current), and scanner manufacturer
details for each site used as a testing dataset. Values are reported as counts (n) and percentages.
50

===== PAGE 51 =====
b)
c)
a)
d)
Figure 17: External Validation Experiments Summarized. Merlin external validation on 37,885 abdominal CTs from three
external sites and 5,137 internal CTs compared to alternative architecture baselines. We extend the internal and external validation
(Figure 2b) on abdominal CTs to include alternative architectures evaluated on: (a) the Merlin internal test set, (b) the External
Site #1, (c) External Site #2, and (d) External Site #3, using the zero-shot classification task and reporting F1 scores. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. Across all baselines, Merlin consistently achieves the highest performance.
51
