
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
1 
GeneCompass: Deciphering Universal Gene Regulatory Mechanisms 
with Knowledge-Informed Cross-Species Foundation Model 
 
Xiaodong Yang1,4,11,#, Guole Liu5,10,#, Guihai Feng1,2,3,#,*, Dechao Bu4,7,11,#, Pengfei Wang8,11,#, 
Jie Jiang6,#, Shubai Chen4,11,#, Qinmeng Yang8,#, Yiyang Zhang9,11, Zhenpeng Man9,11, 
Zhongming Liang9,11, Zichen Wang5,10, Yaning Li4,11, Zheng Li8, Yana Liu1, Yao Tian1,11, Ao 
Li5,10, Jingxi Dong1, Zhilong Hu8,11,Chen Fang1,11, Hefan Miao1,11, Lina Cui1,11, Zixu Deng4,11, 
Haiping Jiang1,11, Wentao Cui8,11, Jiahao Zhang9,11, Zhaohui Yang4,7,11, Handong Li6,10, Xingjian 
He6, Liqun Zhong5,10, Jiaheng Zhou5,10, Zijian Wang8, Qingqing Long8, Ping Xu8,11, The X-
Compass Consortium$, Hongmei Wang1,2,3, Zhen Meng8,11, Xuezhi Wang8,11, Yangang Wang8,11, 
Yong Wang9,11,*, Shihua Zhang9,11,*, Jingtao Guo1,2,3,11,*, Yi Zhao4,7,11,*, Yuanchun Zhou8,11,*, Fei 
Li8,11,*, Jing Liu6,10,*, Yiqiang Chen4,11,*, Ge Yang5,10,*, Xin Li1,2,3,11,* 
 
1 State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing,100101, China 
2 Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100101, China 
3 Beijing Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Beijing, 100101, China 
4 Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing 
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
5 State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
6 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
7 Research Center for Ubiquitous Computing Systems, Institute of Computing Technology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
8 Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100083, 
China 
9 CEMS, NCMIS, HCMS, MDIS, RCSDS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
10 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100864, China  
11 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100864, China 
# These authors contributed equally to this work.  
* Correspondence: xinli@ioz.ac.cn (X. Li), ge.yang@ia.ac.cn (G. Yang), yqchen@ict.ac.cn (Y. 
Chen), jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn (J. Liu), lifei@cnic.cn (F. Li), zyc@cnic.cn (Y. Zhou), 
biozy@ict.ac.cn (Y. Zhao), jingtao.guo@ioz.ac.cn (J. Guo), zsh@amss.ac.cn (S. Zhang), 
ywang@amss.ac.cn (Y. Wang), fenggh@ioz.ac.cn (G. Feng),  
$ A list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper. 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
2 
Abstract 
Deciphering the universal gene regulatory mechanisms in diverse organisms holds great 
potential to advance our knowledge of fundamental life process and facilitate research 
on clinical applications. However, the traditional research paradigm primarily focuses 
on individual model organisms, resulting in limited collection and integration of 
complex features on various cell types across species. Recent breakthroughs in single-
cell sequencing and advancements in deep learning techniques present an 
unprecedented opportunity to tackle this challenge. In this study, we developed 
GeneCompass, the first knowledge-informed, cross-species foundation model pre-
trained on an extensive dataset of over 120 million single-cell transcriptomes from 
human and mouse. During pre-training, GeneCompass effectively integrates four types 
of biological prior knowledge to enhance the understanding of gene regulatory 
mechanisms in a self-supervised manner. Fine-tuning towards multiple downstream 
tasks, GeneCompass outperforms competing state-of-the-art models in multiple tasks 
on single species and unlocks new realms of cross-species biological investigation. 
Overall, GeneCompass marks a milestone in advancing knowledge of universal gene 
regulatory mechanisms and accelerating the discovery of key cell fate regulators and 
candidate targets for drug development. 
 
Key words: single-cell sequencing, foundation model, cross-species, knowledge-
informed 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
3 
Introduction 
Vertebrate organisms are intricate systems composed of up to trillions of cells that 
classified into hundreds of different types. These cells collaborate to form different 
tissues and organs, each serving a unique set of physiological functions1,2. Elucidating 
the gene regulatory mechanisms underlying these tissues and organs is crucial for 
deciphering the patterns of individual development and promoting clinical therapies. 
With the rapid advances in omics sequencing technologies, we have now started to 
dissect how cells in various organs exert their specific functions in single cell 
resolution3 and accumulated large amount of single-cell data. However, gene 
expression is regulated at multiple levels, ranging from chromatin accessibility to post-
transcriptional modification4,5. This implies that comprehensively deciphering the gene 
regulatory mechanisms solely through wet biological experiments is labor-intensive 
and time-consuming. The emergence of deep learning models, with their ability to 
capture and represent complex patterns in large datasets, offer an opportunity to dissect 
the multi-level and cross-species regulatory mechanisms6,7. 
In recent years, foundation models such as BERT8, GPT9,10, PaLM11,12, and 
LLaMA13 in natural language domains, along with DALL-E14 in visual domains have 
achieved remarkable performance across a wide variety of downstream tasks. They 
typically adopt a paradigm of initial pre-training on extensive data through self-
supervised learning, followed by an adaptation step for specific downstream tasks 
through fine-tuning. Similar to natural language serving as an abstract layer for 
understanding human activities, the transcriptome serves as a representative layer for 
understanding gene regulatory activities within biological systems. Several studies have 
utilized single-cell transcriptomic data to construct pre-trained foundation models, such 
as scGPT15, Geneformer16, and scFoundation17. These works share the commonality of 
leveraging tens of millions of human single-cell transcriptomic profiles to pre-train 
foundation models and have demonstrated remarkable performance across a broad 
range of downstream tasks, such as cell clustering, cell type annotation, gene 
perturbation simulation, and drug target prediction. However, current models have their 
limitations. Given that vertebrate organisms exhibit vast diversity across species, and 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
4 
the evolutionary conservation of gene regulatory mechanisms, the integration of 
datasets from different species represents a remarkable opportunity to unravel the 
intricate complexities of gene regulation2,18-20, while current models solely rely on data 
from a single species. Additionally, the wealth of biological knowledge accumulated 
over previous decades, encompassing core regulatory region data, experimentally 
confirmed gene interactions, and gene family annotations, represents our 
comprehensive understanding of biological processes to date. Infusing these 
knowledges into the pre-training process can substantially guide the model learn the 
universal gene regulatory mechanism in a self-supervised manner. 
In this study, we proposed GeneCompass, a knowledge-informed cross-species 
foundation model pre-trained on scCompass-126M, a currently largest corpus 
encompassing over 120 million single-cell transcriptomes from both humans and mice 
to our knowledge. Importantly, the model incorporates prior biological knowledge 
including promoter sequences, gene co-expression networks, gene family information, 
and transcription factor-target gene regulatory relationships. Through fine-tuning our 
pre-trained model on various downstream tasks, we have achieved superior or 
comparable performance to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models across diverse 
biological context. Overall, our model represents a significant breakthrough in the 
development of foundation models for dissecting universal gene regulatory 
mechanisms across species and expediting the identification of crucial regulators of cell 
fate and potential targets for drug development. 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
5 
Results 
GeneCompass architecture and pre-training 
GeneCompass is a knowledge-informed cross-species foundation model pre-trained on 
transcriptomic corpus of over 120 million cells from human and mouse. GeneCompass 
could be efficiently applied in various downstream biological-related tasks by 
finetuning with limited data (Fig. 1a). Utilizing the self-attention mechanism for 
explicit context encoding21, GeneCompass could understand the essence of cells and 
the intricate relationships among genes based on the input transcriptome. 
We initiated the development of GeneCompass by constructing a large-scale pre-
training corpus, scCompass-126M. This corpus consists of 126 million single-cell 
transcriptomes from human and mouse, which is collected from publicly available 
datasets including an extensive range of organs and cell types (Fig. 1c, d). To ensure 
data quality, we filtered out cells with outlier gene expression. Additionally, we retained 
the informative genes with sufficient variability or expression levels across the dataset 
to capture biological heterogeneity and cell-type-specific signatures. Since there exists 
a different gene list between human and mouse, we aligned their homologous genes by 
sharing the same gene IDs. In this study, the token dictionary contains 17,465 
homologous genes out of total 36,092 genes (Fig. 1a).  
The current landscape of large-scale transcriptomic pre-training models primarily 
utilize relative gene rankings16 or binned gene expression values15 as input, leading to 
inadequate representations of transcriptome. To overcome this limitation, absolute gene 
expression values and corresponding gene IDs are concatenated and then ranked within 
the cell based on the normalized expression values across the entire scCompass-126M. 
(Fig. 1a). The introduction of absolute expression values contributes more fine-grained 
information and leading to stronger supervision constraints in self-supervised learning 
to GeneCompass. To further enhance the capability of our pre-trained model, four 
different types of biological prior knowledge, including promoter sequences, gene co-
expression networks, gene family, and transcription factor-target regulation networks, 
are encoded into a unified embedding space by different methods22,23 (Fig. 1b). To 
denote the species information, a species token embedding is prepended to each cell 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
6 
(Fig. 1a). Overall, GeneCompass integrates gene IDs, expression values and prior 
knowledge together as gene tokens, and utilizes a 12-layer transformer framework8,21 
for cell encoding.  
Inspired by self-supervised learning in natural language processing (NLP) domain, 
the masked language modeling (MLM) strategy8 is employed to randomly mask gene 
tokens including gene IDs, expression values and prior knowledge during the pre-
training. To be detailed, 15% genes are masked randomly for each cell, and then 
GeneCompass recovers gene IDs and expression values of those masked gene 
simultaneously through two separate decoding heads. This multi-task self-supervised 
learning paradigm, which combines the recovery of relative ranks and absolute values, 
enhances the ability to capture the intricate and nuanced complexities of gene 
expression and cell states. 
GeneCompass is capable of species integration and in silico gene network analysis 
Homologous genes often retain similar expression patterns and functional roles. This 
makes the utilization of homology information an effective approach for integrating 
corpus across species24. We hypothesize that homologous genes tend to behave 
similarly across species, while each different genes behaves variously, reflecting the 
conservation and diversity of genes. To validate whether the gene embeddings encoded 
by GeneCompass retain the homology information, we compared the cosine similarity 
of gene embeddings between different genes within the same species, homologous and 
non-homologous genes across different species. 2,000 B cells are randomly selected 
from human and mouse corpus, respectively. In consistent with our hypothesis, 
homologous genes in GeneCompass are more similar than non-homologous ones 
between human and mouse in terms of the statistical distribution of the gene embedding 
similarity. While distinct genes shows distinguishable embedding similarity as expected 
regardless of whether the cell is human or mouse origin (Fig. 2a). These results indicates 
GeneCompass successfully captures the conserved patterns and diversity of genes.  
In consideration that GeneCompass have captured the gene interaction mechanism 
via the pre-training process, we assume in silico gene perturbation assay could simulate 
the biological process at gene level. In previously reports, the deletion of congenital 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
7 
heart disease related genes, GATA4 and its binding partner TBX5, had a significantly 
greater effect on their direct target genes compared with non-directed target genes, 
which was observed in fetal cardiomyocytes25,26. We compare the cosine similarity 
difference of a given gene list when in silico deleting GATA4 and TBX5 individually or 
simultaneously in human cells. Results show that deleting GATA4 or TBX5 individually 
has a significantly more deleterious impact on their direct targets than on indirect targets 
and housekeeping genes (Fig. 2b-e). The result also suggests that the computational 
approach recognizes the cooperative action of GATA4 and TBX5 at these cobound 
targets (Fig. 2f-g). These findings are consistent with those in Geneformer. Additionally, 
as GeneCompass integrates the homologous information across species, we conduct the 
in silico perturbation of GATA4 and TBX5 in mouse cells, yielding similar results with 
human (Fig. 2b-e). Therefore, the extensive experiments validate the homology and the 
gene interaction information are recognized in the gene embeddings encoded by 
GeneCompass, which would promote both zero-shot and fine-tuning downstream tasks. 
GeneCompass boosts cell-type annotation from single-species to cross-species 
While existing methods have shown decent performance on cell type annotation, they 
only focus on single-species tasks. GeneCompass is pre-trained by the cross-species 
corpus, which significantly boosts cell-type annotation from single-species to cross-
species. For single-species cell type annotation, GeneCompass outperforms alternative 
methods when using the same amount of task-specific data for fine-tuning (Fig. 3a). 
With the same size of corpus, GeneCompass is consistently better than other 
benchmarked methods such as Geneformer and scGPT in terms of accuracy and macro-
f1. Additionally, on the task of human-specific cell type annotation, GeneCompass pre-
trained with a combined human and mouse corpus demonstrates superior performance 
compared to models trained solely on the human data, or models trained on equivalent 
amounts of mouse data. This indicates that adding the corpus of different species from 
the downstream task to pre-training could further improve the fine-tuned performance.  
To validate the effectiveness of biological prior knowledge integration, an ablation 
study is performed on the task of human cell annotation (Extended Fig. 1a). The results 
show that the infusion of gene regulatory network (GRN), co-expression (co-exp), or 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
8 
gene-family embedding individually leads to a significant improvement in accuracy. 
While the infusion of promoter embedding solely does not enhance cell annotation 
performance, we anticipate potential improvements in other tasks. Notably, when all 
four knowledge embeddings are combined, there is also an enhancement in cell 
annotation performance. 
In order to evaluate the performance of GeneCompass in a rigorous way, we 
perform single-species cell-type annotation analysis on datasets of diverse organs from 
human and mouse. GeneCompass always achieves the best performance on all datasets. 
Compared with training from scratch, GeneCompass improves the macro-f1 by 10%, 
12% and 18% on different human datasets (i.e., hMS, hLung and hLiver) and by 26%, 
16% and 36% on different mouse datasets (i.e., mBrain, mLung and mPancreas), 
respectively. Furthermore, we compare our model with the SOTA methods. Compared 
with Geneformer, GeneCompass improves the macro-f1 by 3~8% on human datasets. 
Compared with TOSICA27, a recent transformer-based cell type annotation method, 
GeneCompass achieves higher recall on 16 cell types of all 18 types on the mPancreas 
dataset (Extended Fig.1b-d). These results indicate the superiority of GeneCompass on 
multiple-species cell type annotation tasks by using the large-scale cross-species corpus 
and prior knowledge infusion. 
To explore the capability of GeneCompass on cross-species downstream tasks, we 
integrated GeneCompass with the SOTA method CAME28 for cross-species cell type 
annotation. Gene embeddings generated by GeneCompass are utilized as initial gene-
nodes features within CAME. We embarked on a comprehensive evaluation on seven 
paired datasets sourced from four distinct organs (i.e., brain, pancreas, retina, and testis). 
By leveraging the cell type annotations of the mouse, we ventured into the realm of 
forecasting human cell types. Each dataset pair underwent twenty distinct experiments, 
and their averages served as the yardstick for comparison. Following the integration of 
GeneCompass, a subtle yet noteworthy improvement is shown in the prediction 
accuracy in comparison to CAME (Fig. 3d). Particularly, GeneCompass shows a 
pronounced improvement in specific context such as retina, with a surge of 7.5% in 
accuracy. This demonstrates that GeneCompass, through pre-training on cross-species 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
9 
data, has generated gene embeddings with the capability to empower cross-species 
predictions. 
Pre-trained gene embedding elevates GRN inference, drug response and gene 
dosage sensitivity prediction tasks 
To further validate the capability of gene embeddings encoded in GeneCompass, we 
investigate several downstream tasks including GRN inference, drug response and gene 
dosage sensitivity.  
The GRN provides information on gene regulation and signal 
transduction, offering insights into gene expression patterns and key regulatory genes 
in diseases. To evaluate the benefit of pre-trained models on GRN inference, we apply 
gene embeddings of each model on DeepSEM29, an advanced GRN inference tool. The 
AUPRC (area under the precision-recall curve) of the GeneCompass model increases 
consistently with increasing data volume. Compared with other competing methods, 
GeneCompass trained by 55million human data has the best performance in GRN 
inference (Fig. 4a). 
Predicting cellular responses to different types of drugs and their dosages is key to 
promote drug development. We next test GeneCompass on drug dose response 
prediction. Compositional Perturbation Autoencoder (CPA) model is applied on this 
task30. Similar with GRN, gene embeddings produced from each pre-trained model are 
added into CPA. We calculate the average R-Squared score and variance of results from 
each model. Results show that with the increase of data volume, GeneCompass exhibits 
a constantly climbing trend in performance. Notably, GeneCompass pre-trained by 55 
million of human data achieves the highest score (Fig. 4b). Moreover, GeneCompass 
shows lower variance for different drug conditions compared with Geneformer 
(Extended Fig.2d). 
Gene expression profiling helps describe phenotypic features and advances drug 
discovery. DeepCE is a widely used model in the field of predicting drug-induced gene 
expression perturbations31. We are attempting to incorporate gene embedding 
information generated by GeneCompass into DeepCE to assess its impact on the 
model's performance. We calculate root mean squared error (RMSE) of results from 
each model. As the data volume increases, GeneCompass continues to exhibit a 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
10 
consistently improving trend in performance (Fig. 4d).  
In the field of genetic diagnosis, determining which genes are dosage-sensitive 
poses a significant challenge when interpreting copy number variations (CNVs). To 
address this, we utilize pre-defined dosage-sensitive and non-sensitive gene sets as 
training data and employ GeneCompass's gene embedding to construct a fine-tuned 
model for dosage sensitivity gene identification. We observe that as the number of cells 
used for pre-training increases, the predictive performance of GeneCompass in the gene 
dosage sensitivity prediction task consistently improves (Fig. 4e). Specifically, the area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) reaches up to 0.95. It is worth 
mentioning that the gene embedding from GeneCompass outperforms Geneformer 
across all training data sizes in this task. 
Pre-trained gene embedding elevates gene perturbation prediction 
Compared with the impact of drug treatment or changes in gene copy numbers on gene 
expression dosage, functional mutations in genes play a prominent role in causing 
diseases in clinical practice. GeneCompass learns complex interactions between genes 
and incorporates this knowledge into their gene embeddings. We attempt to leverage 
the gene embedding provided by GeneCompass to predict cellular changes resulting 
from perturbations caused by functional gene mutations. We integrate the gene 
embedding of GeneCompass into the advanced perturbation prediction tool GEARS, 
which learns a gene embedding from a gene co-expression knowledge graph and a 
perturbation embedding from a Gene Ontology (GO)-derived knowledge graph32. We 
replaced the original gene embeddings with those from GeneCompass (Fig. 5a). This 
leads to a 15.4% reduction in Mean Squared Error (MSE) for the top 20 differentially 
expressed (DE) genes，indicating a decrease in prediction bias for these critical genes 
(Fig. 5b).  
Pearson correlation coefficient (cor) between the predicted post-perturbation gene 
expression and true post-perturbation expression shows that GeneCompass achieves an 
improvement of 2.2% compared to GEARS, increasing from 79.8% to 82.0% (Fig. 5c). 
Next, we investigate whether GeneCompass could more accurately capture the right 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
11 
direction of changes in gene expression following perturbations and summarize the 
number of top 20 DE genes with incorrect direction for each perturbation prediction. 
This number decreases by 19.4%, from 356 to 287, compared with results predicted by 
GEARS (Fig. 5d).The analysis of deviation for each perturbation prediction in the held-
out testing reveals that both one-gene and two-gene perturbations exhibit lower 
summarized top 20 DE deviation in GeneCompass than in GEARS (Fig. 5e). To be 
specific, GeneCompass provides an extra enhancement of 5.9% for one-gene 
perturbations and of 12.5% for two-gene perturbations than GEARS (Fig 5f).  
Furthermore, we present an example of perturbing the two-gene combination of 
TGFBR2 and PTRG.  Among the top 20 DE genes, the prediction results of 17 genes 
from GeneCompass are closer to the ground truth compared with results from GEARS 
(Fig. 5g). In summary, the gene embedding of GeneCompass provides a more effective 
representation of the relationship between genes, enhancing the prediction of gene 
perturbations. 
GeneCompass is capable of in silico quantitative perturbation for cell 
reprogramming and differentiation  
Owing to pre-training with both ranked gene IDs and expression value, GeneCompass 
learns the gene-gene regulatory mechanism in an exquisitely fine resolution, which 
enables quantitative deciphering gene functions. This implies great potential in 
prediction cell fate transition in different biological process (Fig. 6a). To determine the 
capacity of in silico quantitative perturbation of GeneCompass, we aim to reproduce 
iPSCs induction by OSKM genes (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc33), a well-characterized 
reprogramming paradigm. Two levels of overexpression on OSKM genes are set by the 
median gene values (low-level overexpress) and the maximum value (high-level 
overexpress). We also randomly overexpress another four genes as control. In contrast 
to the control group, the cell state shifts to iPSCs state after in silico overexpressing 
OSKM genes from the initial human fibroblast state in both conditions. A consistent 
result can be obtained from mouse cells (Fig. 6 b). Besides, the high-level 
overexpression obtains a higher similarity with iPSCs compared with low-level 
overexpression. Furthermore, we test GeneCompass on in silico quantitative knock-out 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
12 
assay. Zbtb11 and Zfp131 are transcription factors (TFs) essential for the pluripotency 
of Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) for mouse cells34. Compared to the original state, in 
silico perturbing ESCs shifts gradually to endoderm status by decreasing their 
expression of Zfp131 and Zbtb11 to the half, the quarter and totally knocked out (Fig. 
6c, d). In summary, the results indicate that GeneCompass could simulate the influence 
of gene expression changes on the cellular fate in a quantitative manner. 
Considering finding key biological regulators through wet experiments is labor-
intensive and time-consuming, it is feasible to apply GeneCompass to facilitate this 
process. The early gonadal cells are known to be highly plastic and multipotent, which 
eventually differentiate and give rise to mature and functional somatic cells in adult 
gonad (testis or ovary)35. Systematic single-cell transcriptome analysis of 
embryonic/fetal gonads in mice and humans has revealed the expression of several key 
transcription factors that may play critical roles in early gonadal development36-38. Here, 
we perform an in silico differentiation analysis with GeneCompass on human ESCs to 
investigate whether the activation of specific pathways could shift the cell embeddings 
towards the Leydig state (Fig. 6a). To be specific, each gene in the initial ESCs state is 
overexpressed to the headmost to get a perturbation state one by one. The perturbation 
state could reveal the different differentiation directions of ESCs. By comparing the 
cosine similarities of cell embeddings, we identify five gene regulatory factors 
including WT1, NR2F1, TCF21, NR5A1 and GATA4 exhibiting higher similarity to the 
target Leydig status while lower similarity to the original ESCs (Fig. 6 d, e). This 
indicates that these five genes exert significant promotive effects on ESCs 
differentiation. These findings are also consistent with previously reported studies, 
demonstrating that WT1, NR5A1 and GATA4 can facilitate the differentiation of stem 
cells into Leydig cells.39-41 Thus, GeneCompass proves its capability to predict genome-
wide screening of genes that promote directed differentiation and is expected to 
improve the efficiency of wet experiments through the combination of in silico (dry lab) 
and in vitro (wet lab) experiments. 
 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
13 
Discussion 
In this study, we introduce GeneCompass, a large-scale pre-trained model that 
integrates 126 million cross-species single-cell transcriptome and different types of 
prior biological knowledge. By exploring the embedding information generated by the 
model for various downstream tasks, GeneCompass shows exceptional performance, 
surpassing the capabilities of most existing SOTA models. Throughout the model 
training process, we conduct meticulous ablation experiments to investigate the impact 
of incorporating various types of prior knowledge on cell type annotation tasks. These 
experiments prove that prior knowledge has a positive influence on the performance, 
providing invaluable insights for future developments of foundation models in biology. 
Furthermore, our study reveals that supplementing the gene expression values 
alongside the gene ranked information will further expand the model's capability of 
quantitative deciphering gene functions in an exquisitely fine resolution.  
However, there remains potential for improvement. Currently, our model 
incorporates information from only two species, i.e., human and mouse. When 
attempting to include data from other species, we suspect that the introduction of 
species-specific gene expression patterns may offset the benefits derived from their 
single-cell data. Nevertheless, cross-species unified gene representation provides 
valuable insights to establish universal foundation models. Besides, in terms of 
incorporating prior knowledge, more other essential information such as enhancers and 
protein sequences has not been explored. Additionally, apart from transcriptional data 
at the single-cell level, there exists a wealth of epigenomic, proteomic, and 
metabolomic data that contains rich insights into gene regulation. Investigating 
effective strategies for integrating this multi-modal information into the model 
represents a pivotal avenue for future research. 
Our current model already demonstrates promising performance in multiple 
downstream tasks. As it continues to evolve and gain broader adoption, it could offer 
significant value in optimizing cell fate reprogramming systems, directed organoid 
cultivation, opening up potential applications in clinical contexts. For instance, it can 
be applied to discovery of candidate targets of diseases, tumor drug screening and drug 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
14 
toxicity prediction. We anticipate that the ongoing progress and fine-tuning of 
biological foundation models will bring about significant transformations in both 
fundamental biological research and clinical applications. In the future, the fusion of 
dry and wet experiments will create a novel paradigm in life science research, serving 
as a catalyst for advancements in various areas of the field. 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
15 
Methods 
Collecting and preprocessing of multi-species training data  
We construct a large-scale pre-training corpus, scCompass-126M. This corpus consists 
of more than 120 million single-cell transcriptomes consisting of two different species, 
human and mouse. Multi-species single-cell data provides a rich resource for 
understanding cellular heterogeneity across diverse organisms. However, collecting and 
preprocessing such data can be challenging due to differences in biological processes 
and technical variability between species. Here, we describe the collecting and 
preprocessing of multi-species single-cell training data from two common model 
organisms: human and mouse. 
Among the species, the cells of human and mouse have the highest ratio, and each 
of them consists of over 50 million cells. The data used in this study was curated from 
publicly available datasets collected from various sources, including the National 
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), 
NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA), European Molecular Biology Laboratory-
European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)-ArrayExpress, and China National 
Center for Bioinformation (CNCB)-Genome Sequence Archive (GSA). We download 
FASTQ files from these databases and obtain gene raw counts by running the same 
pipeline. And other gene raw counts data were downloaded directly from the 
CELLxGENE, Single Cell Portal, Curated Cancer Cell Atlas (3CA), Cell BLAST, 
Human Cell Atlas, Temporal Expression during Development Database (TEDD) and 
some biological studies by other authors1,18,42,43. To prepare the multi-species single-
cell data for downstream analyses, we perform several preprocessing steps. For quality 
control, we exclude low-quality and damaged cells, with less than seven genes for 
proteins or miRNAs. Then we conduct normalization and  log1𝑝 transformation to 
reduce the skewness.  
In short, we collect and preprocess multi-species single-cell training data from 
human and mouse. The datasets provide a valuable resource for studying cellular 
heterogeneity across different organisms and for developing machine learning models 
that can generalize across species. Our approach can be adapted to other multi-species 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
16 
datasets and can facilitate the integration of single-cell data from different organisms 
for comparative analyses.  Single-cell data preprocessing is the systematic procedure of 
cleaning, standardizing, and refining raw single-cell data into a structured and 
analyzable format, involving steps such as quality control and gene filtering to remove 
noise, normalization and transformation to account for technical variations, feature 
extraction to retain relevant genes. 
GeneCompass architecture and pre-training  
GeneCompass architecture. GeneCompass employs a 12-layer self-attention 
transformer8,21 to encode input embedding, each composed of a self-attention layer with 
12 attention heads, a feed-forward layer and a layer-normalization layer. GeneCompass 
operates on the sequence of 2048 embedded gene tokens with 768 dimensions, making 
the number of model parameters reach over 100,000,000. GeneCompass uses 
bidirectional self-attention based on the number of genes detected in each cell with the 
pre-trained corpus. During pre-training and finetuning, the Gaussian Error Linear Units 
(GELUs) are employed as nonlinear activation and the dropout probability for both 
attention and dense layer is 0.02 (standard deviation of the initializer for weight 
matrices, 0.02; epsilon for layer normalization layers, 1 × 10-12). Code for model 
configuration, data loading and training is implemented by Pytorch44 and Huggingface 
Transformers library45 for model configuration, data loading and training. Furthermore, 
we extended the library to be capable of inputting scalable external knowledge. 
GeneCompass pre-training and optimization. GeneCompass integrates the gene 
ID, expression value and corresponding prior knowledge (promoter, GRN, gene family 
and co-expression) into together to encode cell transcriptomes. Inspired by self-
supervised learning in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) domain, a masked 
language modeling strategy8 is employed to randomly mask genes including their IDs, 
expressions and prior knowledge during the pre-training. This technique is proven to 
help large models learn better representations effectively. To be detailed, 15% genes are 
selected randomly to mask for each cell. Comparing with the existing works, 
GeneCompass builds a multi-task learning paradigm to predict both the ID and the 
expression of the masked gene based on the encoded embedding in the meanwhile. We 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
17 
use the Mean Square Error (MSE) objective to optimize the model to predict the gene 
expression for unknown genes, which is defined as follows: 
ℒexp =
1
|𝑛unk | ∑!∈#unk  ,𝑥˜!
(%) −𝑥!
(!)0
'
 
where 𝑛unk  denotes the number of unknown gene expressions and 𝑥1!
(%) is the predicted 
gene expression. The ground-truth is denoted as 𝑥!
(%). 
The cross-entropy loss is employed to optimize the gene ID prediction, which is 
defined as follows: 
ℒ() = 2  
!∈#unk 
𝑝(𝑥)log 𝑞(𝑥) 
where 𝑝(𝑥) denotes the predictions and 𝑞(𝑥) denotes the real gene token ID. 
The pre-training parameters are demonstrated as follows: the learning rate is set to 
linear decay with 10,000 warm-up steps and the max learning rate is 1e-3 using AdamW 
optimizer; the batch size is 10 with a gene padding strategy. To make full use of the 
GPU ability, Deepspeed is applied in the code framework as it provides optimizations 
that leverage techniques like dynamic batching, mixed precision, model parallelism and 
memory optimizations to speed up the training of large neural networks while reducing 
their memory consumption, all within a PyTorch-like API. The pre-training process is 
accomplished in 9 days using a 4nodes server with eight Nvidia A800 GPUs.  
Ablation experiment in different data size. An ablation study of GeneCompass 
using different pre-trained cell numbers is carried out. Specifically, for GeneCompass 
pre-trained by the human single-cell transcriptomes corpus, different cell numbers (i.e., 
5× 10*, 5× 10+, 5× 10, and 5.5× 10-) are used. For GeneCompass pre-trained by the 
mouse single-cell transcriptomes corpus, different cell numbers (i.e., 5× 10*, 5× 10+, 
5× 10, and 4.5× 10-) are used. For GeneCompass pre-trained by the human-mouse 
single-cell transcriptomes corpus, different cell numbers (i.e., human 5× 10*+ mouse 
5× 10*, human 5× 10++ mouse 5× 10+, human 5× 10,+ mouse 5× 10,, and human 
5.5× 10-+ mouse 4.5× 10-) are used. To make GeneCompass fully converge, larger 
epochs are used for corpus with smaller cell number (Supplementary Table 2). 
GeneCompass fine-tuning. The GeneCompass model for finetuning consists of an 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
18 
encoder and a decoder. The encoder has 12 transformer layers which are initialized by 
the pre-trained weight, and the decoder is the task-specific layer. The finetune model is 
employed for various downstream tasks such as cell type annotation, dose-response 
prediction and gene regulation network inference. The fine-tuning hyperparameters for 
different downstream tasks may be different since the differences in task paradigms. 
For fair comparison we employ the same hyperparameters (maybe not optimal) in the 
same task across different datasets, which demonstrates the strong generalization of the 
GeneCompass. 
Cell and gene embedding. The 768-dimensions cell embeddings are generated 
from <cls> token, which is added to the beginning of single-cell information to 
represent the characteristics. Besides, GeneCompass could encode each gene to 768 
dimensions which contain the context information of a gene in a single cell 
transcriptome. Note that both cell and gene embedding are obtained from the last layer 
of transformers.  
Knowledge embedding and incorporation 
Four kinds of prior biological knowledge are incorporated into the pre-trained model, 
including promoter sequences, gene co-expression networks, gene family information, 
and transcription factor-target gene regulatory relationships.  
 
Promoter embeddings. The promoter is the non-coding sequence region of a gene, 
serving as the activating signal for gene transcription. In our study, the promoter for 
each gene consists of 2500 bases, including upstream 500 bases before the transcription 
start site (TSS) and downstream 2000 bases behind TSS. The promoter sequences are 
finetuned on the pre-trained model DNABert22 for 40 epochs to obtain the promoter 
embeddings with 768 dimensions.  
 
Co-expression embeddings. Highly co-expressed gene pairs are genes whose 
transcriptional expression profiles are highly correlated in a variety of organs or tissues 
without external interference. Thus, highly co-expressed genes are theoretically related 
and similar. We hope that after encoding, the distance between co-expressed gene pairs 
is as close as possible, and the distance between non-co-expressed genes is as far away 
from each other as possible. This ensures that the similarity between the genes in the 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
19 
high-dimensional space is not affected. Specifically, we calculate the Pearson 
correlation coefficient (PCC) of each gene pair. Gene pairs with PCC larger than 0.8 
are selected for embedding through the gene2vec method23. 
 
Gene family embeddings. Genes in the same gene family have the same ancestral 
gene, so the genes are functionally similar. Therefore, when the genes are embedded in 
the feature space, the genes of the same family should be closer and form gene clusters. 
However, a gene may belong to multiple gene families, and there may be overlap 
between gene families. In order to deal with such complex relationships, we use the 
gene2vec embedding method23 to list all genes with family co-belonging relationship 
as gene pairs when constructing training samples. Gene2vec can adaptively adjust the 
frequency of gene according to the size of the gene family and the number of families 
it belongs to, and fully consider the relationship between a single gene and other genes 
when it belongs to multiple families. In our study, 1645 gene families of humans and 
1539 gene families of mice are used for embedding. The embedding of each gene is 
768-dimensional. 
 
Gene regulatory network (GRN) embeddings. GRN refers to the network 
formed by the interaction between genes in the cell or a specific genome. Among many 
interaction relationships, the regulatory relationship based on transcriptional expression 
between genes is particularly important. Generally, some genes can control the 
expression level of other genes through transcriptional expression. Usually, the GRN is 
a directed graph, each gene represents a node, and the control relationship between 
genes is described by weighted directed graphs in the GRN. Our goal is to refine the 
regulatory network as much as possible, based on the regulatory relationships that have 
been discovered and to learn more unknown interactions between genes. In different 
tissue cells, the regulatory relationship between genes is not static. Our goal is to make 
genes that have more regulatory relationships get closer in embedding space. Thus, we 
count the gene pairs with regulatory relations from GRN. These gene pairs are used for 
embedding through the gene2vec method23. The more the number of regulatory 
relations between gene pairs, the more they appear during training, and finally the closer 
they are after encoding. The embedding of each gene is 768-dimensional. 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 20 =====
 
20 
Multiple downstream tasks 
Single-species cell type annotation. The fine-tuning objective is identifying the type 
of each cell by utilizing its cell embedding generated by GeneCompass. Specifically, a 
fully connected layer is added to class token to predict the cell type from its cell 
embedding. The hyper-meters are as follows: epoch, 30; max learning rate, 5e–5; 
learning scheduler, linear with warmup; optimizer, Adamw with weight decay 0.001; 
warmup steps, 100; weight decay, 0.001; batch size, 10. The cross-entropy loss between 
the predicted cell type probabilities and ground truth is optimized as low as possible. 
For human-specific task, we benchmarked GeneCompass against the transformer-based 
method Geneformer on human multiple sclerosis (hMS), human lung (hLung), and 
human liver (hLiver) datasets. For mouse-specific task, the results GeneCompass with 
and without pre-training are compared on mouse brain (mBrain), mouse lung (mLung), 
and mouse pancreas (mPancreas) datasets. Meanwhile, we benchmarked GeneCompass 
against the method TOSICA on mouse pancreas (mPancreas) dataset. The details of 
datasets used for model training and validation can be found in Supplementary Material. 
Cross-species cell type annotation. We aim to perform integration and cell-type 
assignment while preserving biological variability by utilizing the universal gene 
embeddings from our generative pre-trained model. We apply GeneCompass to 
CAME28 which is a heterogeneous graph neural network called GeneCompass-CAME, 
where cells and genes are modeled as heterogeneous nodes. Also, like CAME, we create 
the heterogeneous graph with six heterogeneous types: ‘cell to gene’, ‘gene to cell’, 
‘cell to cell’, ‘gene to gene’, ‘cell self-loop’, ‘gene self-loop’, where we denote the 
corresponding weights (shared across species) as 𝑊./, 𝑊/., 𝑊.., 𝑊//, 𝑊. and 𝑊/, 
respectively. Unlike CAME, GeneCompass -CAME adopts gene embeddings from our 
generative pre-trained model as input.  
Here, we denote a gene expression matrix with N cells and M genes as 𝑋∈𝑅0×2, 
and the corresponding pre-trained cell embeddings as 𝑋3 ∈𝑅0×4. Taking the pre-
trained cell embeddings as input, the initial embedding (the 0-th layer) for each cell 𝑖 is 
calculated as: 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
21 
ℎ.!
(5) = 𝜎,𝑊.
(5)𝑥3.% + 𝑏.
(5)0, 
where 𝜎 is the leaky ReLU activation function with a negative slope of 0.05 and 𝑥3.% 
is the pre-trained embeddings for cell 𝑖, 𝑊.
(5)and 𝑏.
(5) are learnable weight and bias 
vectors. Genes, unlike cells, lack of pre-trained embedding, so, we aggregate the pre-
trained embeddings for corresponding neighbor cells as the initial embedding for each 
gene as follows: 
ℎ/"
(5) = 𝜎B∑
6
7#",% 𝑊./
(5)𝑥3.%
%∈𝒩#"
%
+ 𝑏/
(5)C, 
where 𝒩/"
.  is the set of cells that have expressed the gene 𝑗, 𝑊./
(5)and 𝑏/
(5) are learnable 
weight and bias vectors. 
For the remaining layers, we use the same strategy as CAME, where we update the 
embeddings of each node under the guidance of the heterogeneous graph and use a 
graph attention layer with multi-head mechanism as the cell-type classifier. At last, we 
take cross-entropy loss with label smoothing mechanism46 as training loss and adopt 
Adam optimizer47 for training. Also, we use AMI to select the best checkpoint, which 
is also consistent with CAME. To evaluate the performance of cell-type assignment, we 
adopted accuracy as metrics which measures the proportion of correctly classified cells 
out of the total number of cells. The details of cross-species datasets used in our study 
can be found in Supplementary Material. 
 
Gene regulatory network prediction. This task involves the prediction of 
interactions and relationships among genes to gain insights into how genes work 
together to control cellular processes. We employ the DeepSEM framework29 to 
evaluate the performance of inferring Gene Regulatory Networks (GRNs) with and 
without GeneCompass embedding. We use Immune Human dataset provided by 
scGPT15, and generate gene embedding from pre-trained GeneCompass model as input 
of a multivariate statistical model to analyze structural relationships among different 
random variables48. we calculate cosine similarity by following equation: 
cos _sim =
𝑥% ⋅𝑥!
∥𝑥%∥∥∥𝑥!∥∥ 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
22 
where x9 or x: is a 2-dimensional vector belongs to gene embedding matrix generated 
from pre-trained GeneCompass with size ( n genes, embed size). ∥x ∥ is the Euclidean 
norm of vector x. 
For the implementation of GRN inference. Firstly, we feed the log-transformed 
scRNA-seq expression data after Z-normalizing into the neural network, the datasets 
come from BEELINE framework49, ground-truth GRNs are available from human 
embryonic stem cells (hESC)50, and the information source: non-specific ChIP-seq51-53, 
collected from the STRING database54. Secondly, we initialized MLPs by using the 
‘kaiming_uniform’4 and initialized W by setting the matrix diagonal as zeros and the 
others following a Gaussian distribution N(1/(m − 1), ε2), in which m stands for number 
of genes and ε denotes a small value to avoid being trapped in the local optimal. The 
values on the diagonal are fixed as zeroes in the whole training process to guarantee 
that W can learn the regulatory network between genes. Finally, we add cosine 
similarity generated from GeneCompass as extra information to indicate the GRN 
learned by DeepSEM (Extended Fig. 2a). 
Drug dose-response prediction. This task refers to the relationship between the 
drug dosage and the biological response in a cell. We employ the Compositional 
Perturbation Autoencoder (CPA)30 model to encode and learn transcriptional drug 
responses across different cell types, dose, and drug combinations, and evaluate the 
performance of predicting drug dose response with and without GeneCompass 
embedding. We use a dataset 𝐷= {𝑥%, 𝑑%, 𝑐%}%;6
0  where each x9 ∈R< describes the gene 
expression of G genes from cell 𝑖. If d9=,9 = 0, this means that perturbation j was not 
applied to cell 𝑖. Unless stated otherwise, the sequel assumes column vectors. Similarly, 
the vector of vectors c9 = (c9.6 … . . . c9.@) contains additional discrete covariates such as 
cell types or species, where each covariate is itself a vector. More specifically, c9,: is a 
K:-dimensional one-hot vector. For the implementation of dose response, we train the 
CPA model using a dataset provided by Srivatsan et al.55, then we load the pre-trained 
CPA model, and implement CPA to reconstruct the expression response of compounds, 
with variable drug-dose combinations by following steps: (1) encoding the gene 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
23 
expression x9 into an estimated basal state 𝑧ˆ%
basal  that does not contain any information 
about (d9, c9), (2) combining 𝑧ˆ%
basal  with learnable embeddings about (d9, c9), and we 
add embedding collected from model (Extended Fig. 2b). 
Gene expression profile prediction. This task refers to estimate the levels of gene 
expression for a set of genes in a biological sample based on various biological 
conditions. We employ the DeepCE31 model designed for phenotype-based compound 
screening to evaluate the performance of GeneCompass embedding by adding it in 
DeepCE’s first component as extra information.  
The DeepCE model consists of three components as follows: the first component 
includes the feature transformation component (GCN), pre-trained network (human 
protein–protein interaction network, extracted from STRING database54) and feed-
forward neural network; the second component contains an interaction network (multi-
head attention) and the last component has a prediction network (two-layer feed-
forward neural network with a rectified linear unit activation function)31. DeepCE 
captures features from chemical compound, L1000 genes56, cell and dosage in the first 
component, and generates high-level feature associations (features from L1000 genes 
and chemical compound) in the second component. In the last component, all the 
features learned from the previous components will be concatenated as high-level 
features to predict gene expression profiles (Extended Fig. 2c). 
For the implementation of predicting drug-induced gene expression perturbations, 
we add embedding collected from GeneCompass at the pre-trained network in 
DeepCE’s first component as extra information, then we run DeepCE model to test 
whether GeneCompass would benefit the performance of DeepCE or not. 
Gene dosage sensitivity predictions. Distinguishing dosage-sensitive versus 
dosage-insensitive transcription factors is critical for explaining copy number variation 
(CNVs) in gene diagnosis. The traditional approach used conservation and allele 
frequency to predict dosage sensitivity. However, these characteristics do not vary with 
cell state and could not capture the specific tissues that would be influenced by dosage 
change of the gene. Following the protocol of Geneformer16, we use 10,000 random 
single-cell transcriptions to fine-tune GeneCompass to distinguish dosage-sensitive and 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 24 =====
 
24 
dosage-insensitive transcription factors. 
In silico perturbation. GEARS learned the gene embedding from the gene co-
expression knowledge graph. This embedding is then combined with the perturbation 
embedding from the Gene Ontology (GO)-derived knowledge graph to predict the post-
perturbation expression. In our study, we replaced GEARS' gene embedding with 
GeneCompass' gene embedding, utilizing the default parameter which set the length of 
gene embedding as 64. To handle cases where a gene, such as gene A, is not listed in 
the token list of a GeneCompass, we rank the genes and use the embedding of the gene 
that precedes gene A in the sorted list. We trained the GeneCompass model (epoch=10) 
using the Norman57 dataset provided by GEARS to predict gene expression after one-
gene and two-gene perturbation. The loss function used for training is a mean squared 
error (MSE) for most differentially expressed genes, which was measured on the 20 
genes with the largest difference between predicted expression and true post-
perturbation expression.  
We then evaluated GeneCompass’ performance on the perturbation of one or two 
genes whose data had been held out at the time of training, and thus those genes had 
not been seen experimentally perturbed during training. Analysis of experimental data 
showed that the expression of genes after perturbation is distributed around the mean 
of the dataset like a normal distribution. Therefore, we use the mean expression change 
of the truth experiment data as the standard for predicting accuracy. For the results of 
predicted expression, we calculate the absolute difference between the predicted values 
and the mean experiment expression values and select the top 20 genes with the most 
significant changes in the perturbed experiment to calculate the sum of the differences. 
This is defined as the top 20 DE deviation and serves as a criterion to evaluate the 
accuracy of predicted results for each perturbation, using the following formula. 
Top 20 DE deviation = 2 |𝑃% −𝑇%|
'5
%;6
 
where 𝑃%  is the predicted postperturbation expression change by GeneCompass or 
GEARS for gene 𝑖, and 𝑇%  is the ground truth of mean expression change in the 
experiments.  
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
25 
In silico quantitative perturbation. The task is designed to simulate the cell 
reprogramming and differentiation inspired by Geneformer16. The perturbation state is 
characterized by the cell and gene embeddings. The in silico quantitative knock out is 
applied by decreasing the target gene’s expression value in the single-cell transcriptome 
input to GeneCompass. The in silico overexpression is realized by increasing the target 
gene’s expression value to a specific value. Note that our method could overexpress or 
decrease gene expressions to any value in silico. After gene expression manipulation, 
the single-cell transcriptome is reordered to simulate the cell state after perturbation. 
The post-perturbation embeddings are obtained by the forward propagation process of 
the encoder in GeneCompass. The effect of in silico quantitative perturbation is 
measured by calculating cosine similarity between the post-perturbation and ground-
truth embeddings, which is defined as follows: 
sim = 1
n 2icosine (𝑆%
A, 𝑇%) −cosine (𝑆%, 𝑇%)k
#
%;6
 
where 𝑆% denotes the source cell state and 𝑇% denotes the target cell states. The in silico 
perturbation state is denoted as 𝑆%
A. 
 
Data and code availability 
All primary data presented in this study will be deposited in a public database, and all 
codes will be uploaded to GitHub: https://github.com/xCompass-AI/GeneCompass.  
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Dr. Dangsheng Li, Dr. Baoyang Hu and Dr. Wei Li for their 
invaluable comments and guidance. We thank Chuanyang Zhang, Jiajia Wang, 
Chengrui Wang, Yan Chen, Yang Wang, Qirui Gu, Shan Zong, Huimin He from the 
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences for their work 
in building website interface for model applications and model visualization. We thank 
Ran Zhang, Meng Xiao and the data process group from the X-Compass Consortium 
for their assistance in data collection and pre-processing. We are grateful to Dr. Weiwei 
Zhai, Dr. Liang Ma and Dr. Fei Gao from the Institute of Zoology for their comments 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 26 =====
 
26 
in setting downstream tasks. We also appreciate Dr. Wei Yang, Xuewei Yuan and Jie 
Zhang for their outstanding management support. We thank Beijing Super Cloud 
Computing Center for their GPU resources for experiments. This work was also 
supported by CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research, Grant No. YSBR-
076. 
 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 27 =====
 
27 
References 
1 
Almanzar, N. et al. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. 
Nature 583, 590-595 (2020). 
2 
Regev, A. et al. The human cell atlas. Elife 6, e27041 (2017). 
3 
Hwang, B., Lee, J. H. & Bang, D. Single-cell RNA sequencing technologies and bioinformatics 
pipelines. Experimental & Molecular Medicine 50, 1-14 (2018). 
4 
Zhu, C., Preissl, S. & Ren, B. Single-cell multimodal omics: the power of many. Nature Methods 17, 
11-14 (2020). 
5 
Li, M. & Belmonte, J. C. I. Ground rules of the pluripotency gene regulatory network. Nature 
Reviews Genetics 18, 180-191 (2017). 
6 
Halfon, M. S. Perspectives on gene regulatory network evolution. Trends in Genetics 33, 436-447 
(2017). 
7 
Angermueller, C., Pärnamaa, T., Parts, L. & Stegle, O. Deep learning for computational biology. 
Molecular Systems Biology 12, 878 (2016). 
8 
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional 
transformers for language understanding. in Proceedings of naacL-HLT. 2, (2019). 
9 
OpenAI. GPT-4 Technical Report. ArXiv abs/2303.08774 (2023). 
10 Brown, T. et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 33, 1877-1901 (2020). 
11 Anil, R. et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10403 (2023). 
12 Chowdhery, A. et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2204.02311 (2022). 
13 Touvron, H. et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2302.13971 (2023). 
14 Ramesh, A. et al. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. in International Conference on Machine 
Learning. 8821-8831, PMLR, (2021). 
15 Cui, H., Wang, C., Maan, H. & Wang, B. scGPT: Towards building a foundation model for single-
cell multi-omics using generative AI. bioRxiv, 2023.2004. 2030.538439 (2023). 
16 Theodoris, C. V. et al. Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature 618, 616-
624 (2023). 
17 Hao, M. et al. Large Scale Foundation Model on Single-cell Transcriptomics. bioRxiv, 2023.2005. 
2029.542705 (2023). 
18 Consortium*, T. S. et al. The Tabula Sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcriptomic atlas of 
humans. Science 376, eabl4896 (2022). 
19 Papatheodorou, I. et al. Expression Atlas update: from tissues to single cells. Nucleic Acids Research 
48, D77-D83 (2019). 
20 Wang, R. et al. Construction of a cross-species cell landscape at single-cell level. Nucleic Acids 
Research 51, 501-516 (2022). 
21 Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 
5998-6008, (2017). 
22 Ji, Y., Zhou, Z., Liu, H. & Davuluri, R. V. DNABERT: pre-trained Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers model for DNA-language in genome. Bioinformatics 37, 2112-
2120 (2021). 
23 Du, J. et al. Gene2vec: distributed representation of genes based on co-expression. BMC Genomics 
20, 7-15 (2019). 
24 Hrycaj, S. M. & Wellik, D. M. Hox genes and evolution. F1000Research 5 (2016). 
25 Ang, Y.-S. et al. Disease model of GATA4 mutation reveals transcription factor cooperativity in 
human cardiogenesis. Cell 167, 1734-1749. e1722 (2016). 
26 Cao, J. et al. A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression. Science 370, eaba7721 (2020). 
27 Chen, J. et al. Transformer for one stop interpretable cell type annotation. Nature Communications 
14, 223 (2023). 
28 Liu, X. Y., Shen, Q. L. & Zhang, S. H. Cross-species cell-type assignment from single-cell RNA-
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 28 =====
 
28 
seq data by a heterogeneous graph neural network. Genome Res 33, 96-111 (2023). 
29 Shu, H. et al. Modeling gene regulatory networks using neural network architectures. Nature 
Computational Science 1, 491-501 (2021). 
30 Lotfollahi, M. et al. Learning interpretable cellular responses to complex perturbations in high-
throughput screens. BioRxiv, 2021.2004. 2014.439903 (2021). 
31 Pham, T.-H., Qiu, Y., Zeng, J., Xie, L. & Zhang, P. A deep learning framework for high-throughput 
mechanism-driven phenotype compound screening and its application to COVID-19 drug 
repurposing. Nature Machine Intelligence 3, 247-257 (2021). 
32 Roohani, Y., Huang, K. & Leskovec, J. GEARS: Predicting transcriptional outcomes of novel multi-
gene perturbations. BioRxiv, 2022.2007. 2012.499735 (2022). 
33 Takahashi, K. & Yamanaka, S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult 
fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126, 663-676 (2006). 
34 Garipler, G. et al. The BTB transcription factors ZBTB11 and ZFP131 maintain pluripotency by 
pausing POL II at pro-differentiation genes. bioRxiv (2020). 
35 Stévant, I. & Nef, S. Genetic Control of Gonadal Sex Determination and Development. Trends in 
Genetics 35, 346-358 (2019). 
36 Shen, Y.-c. et al. TCF21+ mesenchymal cells contribute to testis somatic cell development, 
homeostasis, and regeneration in mice. Nature Communications 12, 3876 (2021). 
37 Guo, J. et al. Single-cell analysis of the developing human testis reveals somatic niche cell 
specification and fetal germline stem cell establishment. Cell Stem Cell 28, 764-778. e764 (2021). 
38 Garcia-Alonso, L. et al. Single-cell roadmap of human gonadal development. Nature 607, 540-547 
(2022). 
39 Zhang, L. et al. Reprogramming of Sertoli cells to fetal-like Leydig cells by Wt1 ablation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112, 4003 - 4008 (2015). 
40 Tanaka, T. et al. Steroidogenic factor 1/adrenal 4 binding protein transforms human bone marrow 
mesenchymal cells into steroidogenic cells. Journal of molecular endocrinology 39 5, 343-350 
(2007). 
41 Yang, Y. et al. Direct Reprogramming of Mouse Fibroblasts toward Leydig-like Cells by Defined 
Factors. Stem Cell Reports 8, 39 - 53 (2016). 
42 Yu, Q. et al. Charting human development using a multi-endodermal organ atlas and organoid 
models. Cell 184, 3281-3298. e3222 (2021). 
43 Suo, S. et al. Revealing the critical regulators of cell identity in the mouse cell atlas. Cell Reports 
25, 1436-1445. e1433 (2018). 
44 Paszke, A. et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. in Neural 
Information Processing Systems. (2019). 
45 Wolf, T. et al. Huggingface's transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1910.03771 (2019). 
46 Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J. & Wojna, Z. Rethinking the Inception Architecture 
for Computer Vision. Proc Cvpr Ieee, 2818-2826 (2016). 
47 Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. CoRR abs/1412.6980 (2014). 
48 Haavelmo, T. The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous equations. Econometrica, 
Journal of the Econometric Society, 1-12 (1943). 
49 Pratapa, A., Jalihal, A. P., Law, J. N., Bharadwaj, A. & Murali, T. Benchmarking algorithms for gene 
regulatory network inference from single-cell transcriptomic data. Nature Methods 17, 147-154 
(2020). 
50 Chu, L.-F. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel regulators of human embryonic stem cell 
differentiation to definitive endoderm. Genome Biology 17, 1-20 (2016). 
51 Garcia-Alonso, L., Holland, C. H., Ibrahim, M. M., Turei, D. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. Benchmark and 
integration of resources for the estimation of human transcription factor activities. Genome Research 
29, 1363-1375 (2019). 
52 Liu, Z.-P., Wu, C., Miao, H. & Wu, H. RegNetwork: an integrated database of transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional regulatory networks in human and mouse. Database 2015, bav095 (2015). 
53 Han, H. et al. TRRUST: a reference database of human transcriptional regulatory interactions. 
Scientific Reports 5, 11432 (2015). 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 29 =====
 
29 
54 Szklarczyk, D. et al. STRING v11: protein–protein association networks with increased coverage, 
supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Research 47, 
D607-D613 (2019). 
55 Srivatsan, S. R. et al. Massively multiplex chemical transcriptomics at single-cell resolution. Science 
367, 45-51 (2020). 
56 Subramanian, A. et al. A next generation connectivity map: L1000 platform and the first 1,000,000 
profiles. Cell 171, 1437-1452. e1417 (2017). 
57 Norman, T. M. et al. Exploring genetic interaction manifolds constructed from rich single-cell 
phenotypes. Science 365, 786-793 (2019). 
 
APPENDIX 
The X-Compass Consortium Members 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Xin Li, Hongmei Wang, Baoyang Hu, Wei Li, Fei Gao, Jingtao Guo, Leqian Yu, Qi Gu, Weiwei 
Zhai, Zhengting Zou, Guihai Feng, Wenhao Liu, Yao Tian, Chen Fang, Jingxi Dong, Yana Liu, 
Jingqi Yu, Wenhui Wu, Xinxin Lin, Cong Li, Yu Zou, Yongshun Ren, Fan Li, Yixiao Zhao, Yike 
Xin, Longfei Han, Shuyang Jiang, Kai Ma, Qicheng Chen, Haoyuan Wang, Huanhuan Wu, 
Chaofan He, Yilong Hu, Shuyu Guo, Yiyun Li 
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Yuanchun Zhou, Yangang Wang, Xuezhi Wang, Pengfei Wang, Fei Li, Zhen Meng, Zheng Li, 
Zaitian Wang, Ping Xu, Wentao Cui, Zhilong Hu, Huimin He, Shan Zong, Jiajia Wang, Yan 
Chen, Chunyang Zhang, Chengrui Wang, Qingqing Long, Ran Zhang, Meng Xiao, Qinmeng 
Yang, Zijian Wang, Yining Wang 
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Yiqiang Chen, Yi Zhao, Xiaodong Yang, Dechao Bu, Xin Qin, Jiaxin Qin, Zhaohui Yang, 
Chenhao Li, Zhufeng Xu, Zeyuan Zhang, Xiaoning Qi, Shubai Chen, Wuliang Huang, Yaning 
Li 
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Ge Yang, Jing Liu, Guole Liu, Jie Jiang, Xingjian He, Liqun Zhong, Yaoru Luo, Jiaheng Zhou, 
Zichen Wang, Qinxuan Luo, Ziwen Liu, Ao Li, Teng Wang, Yiming Huang, Handong Li 
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Yong Wang, Shihua Zhang, Jiahao Zhang, Yiyang Zhang, Shirui Li, Zhongming Liang, 
Zhenpeng Man, Kangning Dong, Qunlun Shen 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 30 =====
 
30 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 31 =====
 
31 
Fig. 1| GeneCompass architecture and pre-training corpus. a, The framework of 
GeneCompass. The model is pre-trained on large-scale single-cell transcriptomes from 
human and mouse. Rather than training from scratch, the pre-trained GeneCompass is 
used on multiple downstream tasks including cell-type annotation, gene regulatory 
network prediction, dosage response prediction, etc. b, Four prior knowledge 
embeddings, including gene regulatory network, promoter sequence, gene family and 
co-expression. c, Organ types of human and mouse in scCompass-126M. d, UMAP of 
different cell types of a sampled subset from scCompass-126M. 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 32 =====
 
32 
 
Fig. 2| Analysis of gene embedding. a, Cosine similarity between different genes of the same 
species and non-homologous genes of different species (*P < 0.05 Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected). 
b-c, Effects of in silico deletion of GATA4 on different gene types, including GATA4 direct 
targets, housekeeping genes, NOTCH1 targets, NKX2-5 targets and GATA4 indirect targets in 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 33 =====
 
33 
human and mouse, respectively. d-e, Effects of in silico deletion of TBX5 on different gene 
types, including TBX5 direct targets, TBX5 indirect targets, and housekeeping genes in human 
and mouse, respectively. f-g, Effects of the combined deletion of GATA4 and TBX5 on cobound 
target genes and housekeeping genes in human and mouse, respectively. 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 34 =====
 
34 
 
Fig. 3| GeneCompass boosts the performance of cell type annotations from single-species 
to cross-species. a, Performance comparison of GeneCompass and other benchmarked methods 
on the downstream task of cell type annotation on human multiple sclerosis (hMS) dataset. 
GeneCompass is pre-trained by the human-mouse (HM, black line), human (H, blue line), and 
mouse (M, red line) single-cell transcriptomes corpus with different cell numbers, respectively. 
“layers6” and “layers12” denote self-attention transformer with 6 layers and 12 layers, 
respectively. The cyan dashed line represents the result of randomly initialized GeneCompass. 
The green circle point and green square point represent the results of Geneformer and scGPT, 
respectively. b, Performance of GeneCompass on hMS, hLung, and hLiver datasets. c, 
Performance of GeneCompass on mBrain, mLung, and mPancreas datasets. d, Cross-species 
cell type annotation from mouse to human of GeneCompass. The datasets in b-d derived from 
human and mouse marked as "h" and "m" respectively and the detailed information of datasets 
can be found in Supplementary Materials.  
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 35 =====
 
35 
 
 
Fig. 4| GeneCompass elevates GRN inference, drug response, gene expression profile, and 
gene dosage sensitivity prediction tasks. a, The framework of three downstream tasks based 
on gene embeddings of GeneCompass. b, Performance comparison on the GRN inference task. 
c, Performance comparison on the dose response task. d, Performance comparison on the gene 
expression profile prediction task. e, Performance comparison on the dosage sensitivity 
transcription factors prediction task. 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 36 =====
 
36 
 
 
Fig. 5| GeneCompass elevates gene perturbation prediction task. a, The workflow of 
GeneCompass for perturbation prediction task. We replaced the GEARS' gene embedding 
learned from gene co-expression knowledge graph with GeneCompass' gene embedding. b, 
Mean Square Error (MSE) in predicting top 20 differentially expressed (DE) genes' expression 
change by GeneCompass and GEARS. MSE was measured on 20 most DE genes between true 
postperturbation expression and prediction results. c, Scatter plot of the predicted 
postperturbation gene expression change and true postperturbation expression change. Each dot 
represents a specific gene, and the Pearson correlation coefficient is marked as "cor". d, Total 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 37 =====
 
37 
number of the top 20 DE genes where the predicted postperturbation differential expression in 
the incorrect direction of the ground truth. e, Expression deviation between the predicted 
postperturbation gene expression and true postperturbation expression for top 20 DE genes by 
GeneCompass and GEARS. f, Percentage of prediction results by GeneCompass showing a 
decrease, no change, or increase in the top 20 differential expression (DE) deviation for one-
gene and two-gene perturbations compared to GEARS. g, Expression change for the combined 
TGFBR2 and PRTG perturbation in true experiment postperturbation, predicted by 
GeneCompass and GEARS. Box-whiskers indicate mean gene expression with standard 
deviation (SD) after perturbing the gene combination TGFBR2 and PRTG (n=205). The red 
triangle symbol shows the gene expression change predicted by GeneCompass with TGFBR2 
and PRTG perturbation excluded during training. The blue square symbol shows the gene 
expression change predicted by GEARS. 
 
 
 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 38 =====
 
38 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 39 =====
 
39 
Fig. 6| In silico quantitative perturbation for cell reprogramming and differentiation. a, 
Diagram of in silico cell fate transition. b, In silico reprogramming of fibroblasts by artificially 
overexpressing OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (OSKM) to the iPSCs state in both human and 
mouse cells. c, In silico perturbation of ESCs by artificially decreasing Zbtb11 or Zfp131 to the 
Endoderm state in mouse cells. "KO 1/2" denotes knocking target gene to the half, " KO 1/4" 
denotes knocking Zbtb11 or Zfp131 gene expression to its quarter; and "KO" denotes totally 
knocking out Zbtb11 or Zfp131 gene in the cell. d, Distribution of cell embedding shift towards 
Leydig status in response to in silico overexpress of candidate targets in human ESCs cells (top 
50 genes towards Leydig status). Selected genes in e are marked in red. e, By ranking the 
embedding similarity of Leydig cells and gene-overexpressed ESCs cells, the listed five genes 
are at the top 30% approximately and set as candidate genes for differentiation. 
 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 40 =====
 
40 
 
Extended Fig.1| Prior knowledge ablation and results of cell type annotation. a, The 
ablation study of four kinds of prior knowledge of GeneCompass on hMS dataset, where ‘+All’ 
means all prior knowledges are concatenated. b, The confusion matrix of GeneCompass on 
mPancreas dataset. c, The difference of recall between GeneCompass and TOSICA for different 
cell types on mPancreas dataset.  
  
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 41 =====
 
41 
 
Extended Fig.2| Workflows of three downstream tasks, i.e., GRN inference (a), drug 
response (b), and gene expression profile (c) prediction. d, The results of dose response 
prediction task, Type A, B, C and D denote results of GeneCompass pre-trained by 0.05, 0.5, 5 
and 55 million human datasets, respectively. 
 
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 42 =====
Promoter
Gene family
Co-expression
GRN
Knowledges
Embedding
GRN inference
Perturbation prediction
Cell-type annotation
Dose response
Self-supervised loss
Expression Decoder
Prediction
Ground-truth
Self-attention
Layer normalization
Layer normalization
Feed-forward network
Encoder 
embedding
ID Decoder
Embedding
Down-stream task
Pre-training
Pre-training
Corpus
ID
Expression
GRN
Promoter
Gene family
Co-expression
Trem2
Fanca
Mask
Psme4
Mask
Zpbp2
Species
<CLS>
<MASK>
…
Over 126 million cells
Gene expression
scCompass-126M
Gene ID
Homology
Species
…
<MASK>
a
d
c
Organ labels
Blood: 10.9%
Brain: 10.4%
Immune cell: 8.8%
Kidney: 5.2%
Lung: 4.9%
Bone marrow: 3.6%
Pancreas: 3.5%
Ovary: 3.4%
Heart: 3.3%
Eye: 3.3%
Skin: 2.9%
Liver: 2.2%
Intestine: 2.1%
Esophagus: 1.9%
Stomach: 1.7%
Prostate: 1.7%
Muscle: 1.6%
Blood vessels: 1.5%
Nervous system: 1.5%
Adipose tissue: 1.3%
Other organ: 24.3%
Organ labels
Nervous system: 32.5%
Lung: 17.9%
Brain: 17.9%
Pancreas: 8.9%
Liver: 6.5%
Airway: 5.7%
Bone marrow: 2.4%
Placenta: 2.4%
Spinal cord: 2.4%
Muscle: 1.6%
Kidney: 0.8%
Spleen: 0.8%
Other organ: 0.0%
UMAP1
UMAP2
UMAP1
UMAP2
B cell
Bergmann glial cell
Cajal-Retzius cell
Cardiocyte
Cardiomyocyte
Chondrocyte
Ciliated cell
Dendritic cell
Embryonic stem cell
Endocrine cell
Endothelial cell
Enterocyte
Enteroendocrine precursor cell
Ependymal cell
Epithelial cell
Erythroblast
Erythroid cell
Erythroid precursor cell
Fibroblast
GABAergic neuron
Glutamatergic neuron
Hematopoietic stem cell
Hepatocyte
Interneuron
Keratinocyte
Macrophage
Microglia cell
Mural cell
Myeloid cell
Natural killer cell
Neural stem cell
Neuron
Neutrophil
Oligodendrocyte
Oligodendrocyte precursor cell
Principal cell
Proximal tubule brush border cell
Pulmonary alveolar type II cell
Schwann cell
Secretory cell
Smooth muscle cell
Stem cell
Type IA spiral ganglion neuron
Type IC spiral ganglion neuron
Type II spiral ganglion neuron
b
Gene regulatory network
Gene regulatory 
embedding
regulaƟon
gene2vec
Promoter embedding
TSS
ATGUTCA
Coding region
Promoter
DNABert
Genes 
families
Genes
Cells
Gene expression values
Pearson 
correlaƟon
threshold
Gene co-expression 
network
Gene co-expression 
embedding
B
C
A
D
E
F
G
Gene knowledges
Gene family embedding
gene2vec
gene2vec
5649
12978
17465
Human
Mouse
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this
this version posted September 28, 2023. 
; 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.26.559542
doi: 
bioRxiv preprint 

===== PAGE 43 =====
b
from_scratch
Geneformer
GeneCompass
hMS
hLung
hLiver
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Macro-f1
0.68
0.75
0.61
0.70
0.84
0.71
0.78
0.87
0.79
hMS
hLung
hLiver
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.81
0.87
0.73
0.84
0.90
0.79
0.87
0.91
0.82
c
from_scratch
GeneCompass
mBrain
mLung
mPancreas
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Macro-f1
0.72
0.47
0.34
0.98
0.63
0.70
mBrain
mLung
mPancreas
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
0.88
0.76
0.71
0.99
0.83
0.87
d
CAME
GeneCompass
NMDA-Mnseq
Cmpbell-Lake
FACS-panc8
LDP60-Mnseq
Baron_m-h
Chen-Lake
testis_m-h
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Accuracy
0.84
0.77
0.62
0.91
0.96
0.88
0.75
0.91
0.79
0.63
0.92
0.95
0.87
0.72
a
No. of cells in pretraining corpus
No. of cells in pretraining corpus
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
Accuracy
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
0.675
0.700
0.725
0.750
0.775
Macro-f1
GeneCompass, HM_layers6
GeneCompass, H_layers6
GeneCompass, M_layers6
from_scratch
Geneformer
scGPT
GeneCompass, HM_layers12
GeneCompass, H_layers12
GeneCompass, M_layers12

===== PAGE 44 =====
a
Cosine similarity
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
Different genes
Human
Mouse
Density
Cosine similarity
Different species
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
*
Homologous genes
Non-homologous genes
Density
f
g
Cosine similarity
Housekeeping
GATA4/TBX5
cobound targets
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Effect of in silico deletion of GATA4 and 
TBX5  on gene embeddings (human)
Cosine similarity
Housekeeping
GATA4/TBX5
cobound targets
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Effect of in silico deletion of GATA4 and TBX5  
on gene embeddings (mouse)
b
c
0.993
0.994
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
1.000
Effect of in silico deletion of GATA4 on human cell
Direct
Indirect
NOTCH1 targets
NKX2-5 targets
Housekeeping
Direct
Indirect
NOTCH1 targets
NKX2-5 targets
Housekeeping
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
1.000
Effect of in silico deletion of GATA4 on mouse cell
d
e
Cosine similarity
Direct
Indirect
Housekeeping
0.994
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
1.000
Cosine similarity
Effect of in silico deletion of TBX5 on human cell
Cosine similarity
Direct
Indirect
Housekeeping
0.995
0.996
0.997
0.998
0.999
1.000
Cosine similarity
Effect of in silico deletion of TBX5 on mouse cell

===== PAGE 45 =====
a
b
c
d
e
Gene embedd g
ni
Large amounts 
of data 
 d
e
nia
rt
e
r
Pencoder
 
embeddng
 
A549 data
 
-
response
Dose 
 
model 
 
  
 
•
•
•
•
drug 
dose
perturbation
species
Information
 
Cosine similarity
 
model
Gene regulatory 
network generation 
 
String databa e
s
DeepCE 
Predicted 
Network 
DDR1 
PAX8 
... 
L1000 Genes
 
Drug do  e
s
Chemical 
compounds
 
 lle
C
GeneCompa
 
s
s
Average precision score
5 * 103
5 * 104
5 * 105
5 * 106
5 * 107
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
DeepSEM
scGPT
Geneformer
GeneCompass
RMSE
5 * 103
5 * 104
5 * 105
5 * 106
5 * 107
2.022
2.024
2.026
2.028
2.030
2.032
2.034
DeepCE
scGPT
GeneCompass
104
105
107
108
106
No. of cells in pretraining corpus
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
AUC
5 * 103
5 * 104
5 * 105
5 * 106
5 * 107
−0.80
−0.75
−0.70
−0.65
−0.60
−0.55
−0.50
Variance
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
Average(R²)
scGPT(Var)
scGPT(Average)
Geneformer(Var)
Geneformer
(Average)
Var(log/10)-GeneCompass 
Average (R²)-GeneCompass
GeneCompass
Geneformer
from_scratch
Geneformer
No. of cells in pretraining corpus
No. of cells in pretraining corpus
No. of cells in pretraining corpus

===== PAGE 46 =====
Co-exp
GO
...
...
...
GeneCompass
Gene embedding
Expression
GEARS model
Postperturbation
expression
P1
Cells
P2
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Top 20 DE MSE
GEARS
GeneCompass
Models
Models
GeneCompass
GEARS
Number of 
genes with incorrect direction
400
300
200
100
0
-2
2
4
6
-2
2
4
6
GEARS (cor=0.798)
GeneCompass (cor=0.820)
Ground truth
Prediction
GEARS
GeneCompass
One-gene perturbation
Two-gene perturbation
Top 20 DE Deviation
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
Decrease
No change
a
b
c
d
f
e
g
HBZ
ALAS2
HBG2
GYPB
PRTG
MT1G
PRSS57
MT1E
GYPA
HBG1
CORO1A
IGFBP2
NPW
MPC2
NFASC
SMIM1
NKG7
GMPPA
MALAT1
MT2A
-2
0
2
4
Delta over mean expression
Ground truth
GEARS
GeneCompass
TGFBR2+PRTG
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Two-gene
One-gene
Percentage
0.059
0.125
Increase

===== PAGE 47 =====
a
1011010100
110101001
01101010
10101001
0110101
10110101
1011010100
01001000100
101101001001
001001010010
10110101001
001000
110
10110101
10101001
1010100
10110101
101101010
1010010010
01010010010
011010100101
101101001010
0110101001101
101101010010
111100101001
10110101001
10001001010
101101010
01001001
10111001
1011010
10110101
101101010
010010010100
101101010010
10110101
0010
01001001010
10111001
01101010
1011010
1011010
10111001
100101001
1011010001
01010010010
101001001010
In silico differentiation
In silico reprogramming
b
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Density
iPSC reprogramming of human
Random
Overexpress low
Overexpress high
−0.0005
0.0005
0.0015
0.0025
−0.0015 −0.0005
0.0005
0.0015
0.0025
0.0035
→ Shift towards iPSC
→ Shift towards iPSC
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Density
iPSC reprogramming of mouse
Random
Overexpress low
Overexpress high
c
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Density
Quantity analysis of inhibiting Zbtb11
Origin
KO 1/2
KO 1/4
KO
→ Shift towards KO Zbtb11
→ Shift towards KO Zfp131
−0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
−0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Density
Quantity analysis of inhibiting Zfp131
Origin
KO 1/2
KO 1/4
KO
e
d
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Rank
GATA4
NR5A1
TCF21
NR2F1
WT1
Random
→ Shift towards Leydig
Shift away ESC 
→ 
0.00030
0.00055
0.00080
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
