
===== PAGE 1 =====
arXiv:2506.23102v1  [eess.IV]  29 Jun 2025
MedRegion-CT: Region-Focused Multimodal LLM for Comprehensive 3D CT
Report Generation
Sunggu Kyung, Jinyoung Seo, Hyunseok Lim, Dongyeong Kim, Hyungbin Park,
Jimin Sung, Jihyun Kim, Wooyoung Jo, Yoojin Nam, Namkug Kim
Department of Bioengineering, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center
babbu3682@gmail.com, namkugkim@mail.ulsan.ac.kr
Abstract
The recent release of RadGenome-Chest CT has signifi-
cantly advanced CT-based report generation. However, ex-
isting methods primarily focus on global features, making
it challenging to capture region-specific details, which may
cause certain abnormalities to go unnoticed. To address
this, we propose MedRegion-CT, a region-focused Multi-
Modal Large Language Model (MLLM) framework, featur-
ing three key innovations. First, we introduce Region Repre-
sentative (R2) Token Pooling, which utilizes a 2D-wise pre-
trained vision model to efficiently extract 3D CT features.
This approach generates global tokens representing overall
slice features and region tokens highlighting target areas,
enabling the MLLM to process comprehensive information
effectively. Second, a universal segmentation model gen-
erates pseudo-masks, which are then processed by a mask
encoder to extract region-centric features. This allows the
MLLM to focus on clinically relevant regions, using six pre-
defined region masks. Third, we leverage segmentation re-
sults to extract patient-specific attributions, including organ
size, diameter, and locations. These are converted into text
prompts, enriching the MLLM’s understanding of patient-
specific contexts. To ensure rigorous evaluation, we con-
ducted benchmark experiments on report generation using
the RadGenome-Chest CT. MedRegion-CT achieved state-
of-the-art performance, outperforming existing methods in
natural language generation quality and clinical relevance
while maintaining interpretability. The code for our frame-
work is publicly available.
1. Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) plays a crucial role in med-
ical diagnostics, providing clinicians with detailed infor-
mation about anatomical structures and pathological con-
ditions [1]. Compared to 2D imaging, 3D CT captures spa-
tial relationships and lesion details with higher precision,
Figure 1. Comprehensive radiological workflow for clinical di-
agnosis. (a) Initial Overview: fast and slow scanning techniques
for preliminary image review. (b) Analysis by Region: system-
atic assessment of major organ systems. (c) Clinical Integration:
correlation with various medical information for comprehensive
patient evaluation.
thereby enabling more accurate and comprehensive diag-
noses. However, manually analyzing numerous CT slices
and generating radiology reports is a time-consuming and
labor-intensive task for radiologists [2, 3]. Therefore, the
development of automated systems that enhance diagnostic
quality while alleviating clinicians’ workload is essential.
Recent progress in Multi-Modal Large Language Mod-
els (MLLMs) [4–8] have facilitated the effective handling
of complex multimodal tasks by leveraging the robust lan-
guage understanding capabilities of large language models
(LLMs). In line with these advancements, MLLMs in the
medical domain have demonstrated the ability to compre-
hend medical images and relevant clinical information, en-
abling their application in report generation tasks.
Yet, most existing studies primarily focus on 2D med-

===== PAGE 2 =====
ical images, leaving the field of report generation for 3D
data (e.g., CT, MRI) relatively unexplored. This limitation
can be attributed to several technical challenges such as data
scarcity, the complexity of feature extraction, and the high
computational cost associated with processing large-scale
datasets [9, 10].
The recent release of large-scale 3D CT datasets, such
as CT-RATE [11] and RadGenome-Chest CT [12], has cre-
ated new opportunities for advancements in 3D medical im-
age analysis and report generation. Notably, open-source
3D medical MLLMs [13–17] have shown promising re-
sults in few tasks such as anomaly detection and context
retrieval. However, these MLLMs predominantly rely on
global volume-level features, which limits their ability to
capture the fine-grained, region-specific details that are es-
sential for report generation. To advance MLLMs towards
generating diagnostically valuable CT reports, it is crucial
to develop models that not only extract region-focused in-
formation effectively but also integrate it seamlessly into the
report generation process.
Another challenge in analyzing 3D medical images is
the absence of robust and well-optimized encoders. While
2D medical images share a similar data structure with natu-
ral images, allowing for transfer learning using pre-trained
universal 2D encoders [18–20], 3D medical images dif-
fer significantly from natural images. This makes it diffi-
cult to directly apply existing encoders to 3D medical im-
ages. Inevitably, 3D encoders require extensive pre-training
for medical imaging applications, which entails substantial
computational costs.
Radiologists initially review CT scans on a slice-wise ba-
sis to perform a rapid holistic assessment, followed by a fo-
cused examination of specific slices where key organs are
clearly visible, allowing them to extract detailed regional
features critical for precise diagnosis (see Fig. 1-(a)). To ef-
fectively capture regional features in a similar manner, we
introduce Region Representative (R2) Token Pooling. In
this method, global tokens are constructed from visual to-
kens extracted from individual slices of a CT scan, while
additional region tokens are derived from clinically infor-
mative slices. By incorporating these global tokens and rep-
resentative region tokens, this framework enables to process
3d visual features efficiently.
After an initial overview, radiologists typically conduct
organ-based analysis to obtain more detailed information
(see Fig. 1-(b)). To emulate this analytical protocol, we in-
troduce a Mask-Driven Visual Extractor for region-focused
feature extraction. In this method, a universal segmenta-
tion model generates pseudo-masks for key organs. These
pseudo-masks are processed through the mask driven ex-
tractor to extract mask tokens and spatial tokens, which are
integrated into the LLM.
Additionally, radiologists make their diagnostic deci-
sions based on various medical information (see Fig. 1-
(c)). We process the pseudo-masks of key organs and le-
sions through a deterministic algorithm to extract Patient-
Specific Attributes (e.g., organ volume, diameter, lesion lo-
cation), which are then incorporated into the LLM as textual
prompts. This strategy enhances the precision and clinical
relevance of the generated reports by providing personal-
ized diagnostic insights.
In summary, we propose MedRegion-CT, an effective
framework for generating 3D CT reports. In our experi-
ments setting, MedRegion-CT achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance in report generation tasks, surpassing existing
methods in clinical validity and interpretability. The gen-
erated reports exhibit superior accuracy and coherence, sig-
nificantly enhancing the framework’s applicability in real-
world clinical settings. Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a Region Representative (R2) Token Pool-
ing that efficiently extracts features from 3D CT images
by leveraging pre-trained 2D vision models, generating
region tokens focused on clinically informative slices, as
well as global tokens representing the entire scan.
• We propose Mask-Driven Visual Extractor that processes
the pseudo-masks generated by the universal segmenta-
tion model to extract region-focused features, allowing
LLM to capture localized information of the region.
• We extract Patient-Specific Attributes from the pseudo-
masks and convert them into textual prompts, enhanc-
ing the LLM’s contextual understanding of the individual
case.
2. Related Work
2.1. Medical MLLMs.
Recent advancements in MLLMs have demonstrated com-
petent performance by employing LLM as decoders and us-
ing instruction-following sets [21]. 2D medical MLLMs
[22–30] have been developed by finetuning open source
LLMs and using robust 2D vision models on large-scale
paired medical image–text datasets [31–33]. These models
have achieved remarkable performance across various med-
ical applications, including report generation, visual ques-
tion answering (VQA), and disease diagnosis.
Despite these advancements, the development of 3D
medical MLLMs has been comparatively restricted, mainly
due to limited suitable data. To address these challenges,
Hamamci et al. [17] introduced the CT-RATE dataset, con-
sisting of 26K chest CT volumes paired with their corre-
sponding radiology reports. Wu et al. [13], Bai et al. [15]
collected diverse 3D medical data from publicly accessible
professional medical websites and tailored them for various
3D medical tasks. Recently, the release of RadGenome-
Chest CT [12], a large-scale grounded dataset has opened
new possibilities for further advancement in the field of 3D

===== PAGE 3 =====
MLLMs.
Currently, several open-source 3D medical MLLMs have
been introduced. RadFM [13] is a pioneering radiology-
based model that processes both 2D and 3D scans across
multiple imaging modalities through its combined 3D ViT
and Perceiver architecture.
MedBLIP [14] further en-
hanced capabilities by incorporating EHR data and employ-
ing MedQFormer to adapt 3D images to pre-trained 2D en-
coders. CT2Rep [16] leveraged 3D Auto-regressive Trans-
formers and memory-driven decoders to effectively pro-
cess longitudinal data. M3D [15] employed 3D ViT en-
coders with spatial pooling perceivers to compress high-
dimensional tokens, while also enabling promptable seg-
mentation. Despite these advancements, challenges remain
in dataset diversity, computational optimization, and stan-
dardized evaluation.
2.2. 3D Vision Encoder for MLLMs.
In the 3D medical MLLM domain, extracting spatial fea-
tures has long been a challenging task. Prior research com-
monly adopts one of two approaches. The first uses a 3D
vision encoder like 3D ViT, which partitions an entire imag-
ing volume into fixed-size 3D patches. Most MLLM mod-
els [13, 15, 34] depend on such 3D vision encoders. How-
ever, Due to the uniqueness of medical data (e.g., CT and
MRI), these encoders often require pretraining from scratch
and may fail to capture slice-level details.
The second approach extracts features from each 2D
slice independently and then aggregates them. While this
method benefits from pretrained 2D encoders, it can lose
3D context and inter-slice consistency. To address these is-
sues, CT2Rep employs a CT-ViT [35] structure that groups
selected slices before integrating them. MS-VLM [36] pro-
cesses slices individually, then uses a z −former to ef-
ficiently aggregate slice-level features, whereas Med-2E3
[37] fuses features derived from both 3D and 2D encoders.
Even if 3D features are successfully extracted, the high di-
mensionality and large number of tokens in 3D medical data
can create a heavy computational burden when fed into the
LLM. Inevitably, MLLM methods often compress vision
features to reduce computational cost while retaining spa-
tial relationships and detailed context.
Recently, the video editing domain has adopted a dual
frame rate strategy—incorporating both slow and fast
frames—to achieve more comprehensive content repre-
sentation while significantly enhancing computational effi-
ciency [38–40]. Inspired by the slow-fast architecture [41],
we optimize computational efficiency by reinterpreting the
concept of fast and slow tokens in the medical domain.
Fast tokens were designed to provide depth information by
embedding all slices while using fewer visual tokens per
slice. In contrast, slow tokens, generated by embedding
slices that represent key regions, capture rich local infor-
mation by employing more visual tokens per slice.
2.3. Region-Focused MLLMs.
Several studies [42–44] in general domains have explored
the incorporation of local features into LLMs, demonstrat-
ing their potential for region-level understanding. However,
region-level interpretation in medical imaging remains rel-
atively underexplored. Most existing medical MLLMs pro-
cess entire images as a single representation, making it dif-
ficult to generate text focusing on specific regions. Further-
more, medical reports often describe multiple regions si-
multaneously.
To
help
identify
specific
clinically
important
re-
gions, several studies fine-tuned models using instruction-
following sets composed of Refer-and-Ground Conversa-
tions that utilize bounding-box-based coordinate informa-
tion [45–47].
These datasets enable models to focus on
specific regions, supporting object detection and grounded
radiology report generation.
MAIRA-2 [48] proposed
the Grounded Radiology Report Generation task, utiliz-
ing datasets that provide annotated locations correspond-
ing to each finding in chest X-rays (CXR). A few studies
[49, 50] have focused on utilizing region-of-interest (ROI)-
aligned features and integrating it into the LLM. For in-
stance, RGRG [49] employs a detector to extract ROI fea-
tures for CXR report generation, allowing for more fine-
grained descriptions.
Recently, semantic segmentation-
based approaches have been explored to provide LLMs with
pixel-level features. MAIRA-SEG [28] uses mask-aware
visual extractor proposed in Osprey [51] to extract segmen-
tation tokens from major organ and lesion pseudo-masks
obtained by expert models. These segmentation tokens are
then combined with CXR images to serve as input for the
LLM. Similarly, Reg2RG [52] utilizes universal segmenta-
tion models [53] to extract organ pseudo-masks from CT
images, preserving geometric information while retaining
texture features in local embeddings. These local features
are subsequently combined with global features to establish
a coherent contextual understanding.
Building on these prior studies, we adopt SAT [53], a
universal segmentation model, to extract pseudo-masks and
propose a framework that effectively integrates semantic
segmentation information.
2.4. Extention of Textual Prompts
Prompts were originally introduced as a natural language
processing technique to improve the generalization of lan-
guage models [54]. This method allows a language model to
contextualize its inputs through text templates, thereby im-
proving its ability to adapt to diverse tasks. Recent critical
analyses of MLLMs have highlighted issues such as hallu-
cination and reasoning errors induced by the transmission
of visual features. [55, 56].

===== PAGE 4 =====
Figure 2. Overview of MedRegion-CT. In R2 token pooling, CT images processed in slice-wise independent manner undergo efficient
feature extraction, yielding 3D vision tokens composed of global tokens and region representative tokens. Pseudo-masks are tokenized
through R2 pooling to correspond with Multi Level visual tokens, and these are subsequently combined via mask pooling. Spatial tokens
are derived from pseudo-masks through a location extractor. These two types of token collectively form the segmentation tokens. The
patient-specific attribute extractor derives key morphological characteristics unique to each lesion from pseudo-masks. These three types
of tokens are fed into an LLM to perform report generation along with a prompt.
To address these challenges, various methods utilizing
prompts have been proposed. Qin et al. [57] leverages a pre-
trained vision–language model to automatically construct
medical prompts encompassing various graphical attributes
such as color, texture, and shape. PromptMRG [58] is a
pioneering study in introducing prompts to the medical re-
port generation task, converting diagnostic outcomes into
prompts. Dia-LLaMA [59] employs a disease-recognition
attention module to extract disease-specific features from
CT scan and classify the presence of each disease. The clas-
sification results are then transformed into diagnostic text
prompts to guide the LLM. Insight [60] uses an instance-
segmentation-based visual translator to convert meibogra-
phy image into quantifiable morphological data, provid-
ing detailed insights in conjunction with clinical context.
RadGPT [61] applies a deterministic algorithm to transform
voxel-level annotations of tumors and organs into a struc-
tured report, thereby ensuring diagnostic consistency. In-
spired by the methodology of RadGPT, we extracted sup-
plementary clinical information from pseudo-mask and in-
corporated it into the LLM as textual input to enhance the
quality of generated reports.
3. Method
MedRegion-CT. When generating a radiology report, ra-
diologists typically analyze medical images region by re-
gion. Inspired by this workflow, MedRegion-CT generates
reports for 6 predefined anatomical regions instead of pro-
ducing a full report. These individual region reports are
subsequently merged to construct the final report. To align
with this approach, we preprocessed the ground truth report
by splitting them into the same predefined regions, creating
a training set with the expected format. The architecture of
MedRegion-CT is presented in Fig. 2. MedRegion-CT con-
sists of 5 key elements: 1) 2D encoder for processing indi-
vidual CT slices, 2) R2 Token Pooling that integrates fea-
tures extracted at the slice level to construct 3D features, 3)
Mask-Driven visual extractor, 4) Patient-Specific Attribute
Extractor, 5) LLM.
We first employ a universal segmentation model to gen-
erate pseudo-masks for CT anatomical structures. These
pseudo-masks serve as pseudo-labels for the MLLM. To
extract visual features from each CT slice, we utilize a pre-
trained 2D image encoder. We then integrate these features
through R2 Token Pooling, a novel approach that combines
global tokens and region-representative tokens to construct
Tvision, the vision tokens of the image. Tvision is integrated
with the pseudo-masks to input the Mask Driven Visual Ex-
tractor. The Mask Driven Visual Extractor generates mask
tokens and spatial tokens, which collectively form segmen-
tation tokens, Tseg. Additionally, medical information is
extracted from the pseudo-masks using deterministic algo-
rithms, which are then converted into patient-specific at-
tribute text tokens Tattr for comprehensive representation
of medical data. Tvision, Tseg, Tattr are provided as input
to the LLM with instruction prompts I. The LLM generates
the report R. This can be formulated as:

===== PAGE 5 =====
R = LLM(Tvision, Tseg, Tattr, I)
(1)
This enables the generation of precise medical reports
focused on specific anatomical regions. The following sec-
tions provide detailed explanations of each element.
3.1. Structured Report Generation
To analyze chest CT scans in a structured way, we divide the
anatomical field of view into 6 regions: 1) Lung, 2) Large
airways, 3) Mediastinum, 4) Heart and great vessels, 5) Os-
seous structures, and 6) Upper Abdomen. This categoriza-
tion reflects the methodical approach that radiologists use
to interpret chest images, ensuring that each region is eval-
uated for relevant pathology [62]. Additionally, this struc-
tured approach contributes to the quality and consistency
of radiology reports by facilitating comprehensive docu-
mentation of findings across all anatomical structures [63].
For segmentation of the six primary regions, our framework
does not depend on a specific segmentation model and pos-
sesses a flexible architecture that facilitates the integration
of various segmentation models as required.
3.2. 3D Vision Token Using R2 Token Pooling
Generally, encoders using slice-wise strategies outputs D
× T tokens when processing 3D images (D is depth or
the number of slices, T is the number of tokens per slice).
While this approach would ideally involve all slices along
the depth axis, directly inputting such large number of to-
kens to the LLM module requires substantial computational
resources. To address this issue, we adopted the concepts of
fast and slow tokens introduced in LITA [38] and generated
global tokens and region representative tokens from 3D CT
images.
Global tokens Tglob are densely sampled to provide slice
depth information. We obtain one global token from each
slice by averaging all visual tokens, resulting in a total of
D global tokens.
Region representative tokens Treg are
sparsely sampled to preserve more detailed spatial informa-
tion. We select s slices from the CT, and for each slice, we
performed spatial adaptive pooling to downsample the to-
kens by a factor of s. For each slice, we obtain T
s tokens,
resulting in a total of T region representative tokens.
Unlike LITA [38], we applied a region-centric method
for slow token sampling rather than uniform sampling. We
sample representative slice for each region by selecting the
slice with the highest number of pseudo-mask pixels.
The obtained Tglob and Treg tokens are merged to con-
struct the final 3D vision token.
Tvisual = Concat(Tglobal, Tregion)
(2)
This approach allows us to represent 3D CT with a total of
D + T tokens, compared to D × T tokens. This dramatically
reduces the token count while effectively preserving inter-
slice relationships and spatial information.
3.3. Mask-Driven Visual Extractor
To extract mask features, MAIRA-SEG [28] utilizes the
mask encoder of Osprey [51], with a transformer-based
Rad-DINO (ViT-B backbone) [64]. We adopt the MAIRA-
SEG’s mask aware visual extractor to obtain mask tokens
and spatial tokens. Mask tokens are generated from multi
level visual tokens and pseudo-masks by applying mask
pooling and linear projections. Spatial tokens are derived
from the pseudo-masks through flattening and linear projec-
tion. Mask tokens and spatial tokens are then concatenated
to form segmentation tokens. This approach is highly effi-
cient, as it generates only two segmentation tokens for each
mask, making it well-suited for the LLM’s fixed computa-
tional capacity and context length. The extracted segmenta-
tion tokens are used to prompt the LLM along with image
and text tokens.
Compared to MAIRA-SEG [28] which is restricted to
2D images, we expand this architecture to 3D. To miti-
gate the computational burden associated with 3D exten-
sion, we applied Mask-Driven Visual Extractor. Instead of
directly utilizing multi-level image features, we adapts R²
token pooling in mask pooling operation as illustrated in
Fig.2. Mask information tokenized through R² token pool-
ing is aligned with multi-level visual tokens to facilitate
mask pooling.
Another key distinction from MAIRA-SEG [28] is our
consistent placement of text and segmentation tokens in
fixed positions, regardless of mask positivity.
This en-
ables direct recognition of segmentation information inde-
pendent of prompt structure and facilitates extension to le-
sion masks by allowing autonomous assessment of lesion
presence based on mask information.
Apart from the aforementioned modifications, we use
the same hyperparameter settings as MAIRA-SEG, includ-
ing the linear projector, embedding dimension size, specific
layer output indices of the ViT-B-based encoder, and the
number of segmentation tokens.
3.4. Patient Attribution Extractor
MLLMs have certain limitations in processing visual data
through encoders, and there is a possibility of losing details
during the cropping and resizing of CT images. To address
this, we propose a method of extracting additional clinical
information using pseudo-masks. In this study, inspired by
the vision translator concept suggested in previous research
[60, 61], we quantitatively extracted clinical information us-
ing deterministic algorithms. This transformation technique
serves to integrate rich morphological details into the LLM
by providing additional clinical metadata. We extracted (1)
volumetric measurements for the lungs, heart, liver and kid-

===== PAGE 6 =====
Method
NLG Metrics
LM Based Metrics
BLEU-4
ROUGE-L
METEOR
CA-F1 score
Green score
GPT-4 score
CT2Rep [16]
0.242
0.347
0.431
0.305
0.374
44.508
RadFM [13]
0.262
0.365
0.489
0.350
0.234
46.178
MedBLIP [14]
0.279
0.373
0.494
0.370
0.215
46.825
M3D [15]
0.288
0.391
0.497
0.435
0.297
47.243
Ours (Ablation-R2+Attr+Mask)
0.290
0.375
0.494
0.450
0.278
48.837
Ablation-R2+Mask
0.280
0.367
0.498
0.430
0.264
44.457
Ablation-R2+Attr
0.293
0.375
0.489
0.425
0.282
47.319
Ablation-R2
0.261
0.345
0.481
0.405
0.233
43.014
Ablation-LITA [38]
0.268
0.343
0.479
0.385
0.231
42.293
Table 1. Comparison of NLG* Metrics and LM* Based Metrics on the generated reports between MS-VLM and baseline methods. LM
Based Metrics include CA-F1 score (averaged across 18 chest-related abnormalities), Green Score, and GPT-4 score. The best performance
is highlighted in bold and the second-best is underlined. LITA [38] uniformly sample slices for slow tokens. R2 denotes our Region
Representative (R2) Token Pooling, which sample slices for slow tokens with region-centric method. Attr denotes our Patient Attribution
Extractor. Mask denotes our Mask-Driven Visual Extractor. *NLG: Natural Language Generation, LM: Language Model.
ney, (2) count, diameter and spatial location data for le-
sions (nodules, effusion and cysts), as can be seen in Fig.
4. The extracted clinical information was subsequently re-
structured into patient-specific reports and delivered to the
LLM in textual form, as shown in Fig. 5. This contributes
to the generation of more reliable region-centric reports.
Measuring organ volumes and characterizing lesions
yields clinically significant information across various dis-
ease states. In patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
(IPF), lung volume progressively declines and demonstrates
strong correlation with pulmonary function [65]. These vol-
umetric measurements therefore serve as valuable quantita-
tive biomarkers for both disease diagnosis and prognostic
evaluation. Furthermore, the conversion of nodule masks
and kidney cyst masks into textual attributes enhances ra-
diologists’ interpretative capabilities [66, 67]. When rep-
resented as textual parameters, these measurements can fa-
cilitate more precise disease characterization and outcome
prediction.
4. Experiment
4.1. Dataset and Evaluation Metric
Dataset.
In our study, we utilized RadGenome-Chest CT
[12], a comprehensive dataset designed for 3D chest CT in-
terpretation. Built upon CT-RATE[17], this dataset contains
25,692 non-contrast chest CT volumes with correspond-
ing radiology reports from approximately 20,000 patients.
RadGenome-Chest CT provides detailed organ-level seg-
mentation masks covering 197 anatomical regions, which
were generated using SAT [53], the latest powerful text-
prompted universal segmentation model. The dataset fea-
tures 665K grounded reports where each sentence links to
specific anatomical regions in the CT volumes through seg-
mentation masks. We merged these numerous anatomical
regions into six clinically relevant regions that we defined
for our research. For each of these six regions, we inte-
grated the corresponding report sentences to create com-
prehensive region-specific reports, which we then used as
ground truth text. We followed the official dataset division,
with 20,000 patients (24,128 volumes) allocated to train-
ing/validation and 1,304 patients (1,564 volumes) for test.
Evaluation Metric.
Evaluating generated radiology re-
ports requires assessing both linguistic similarity and clin-
ical accuracy. Our methodology incorporates two metric
categories: 1) Natural Language Generation (NLG) Met-
rics include BLEU [68] (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy),
which calculates n-gram precision between candidate and
reference texts; ROUGE (Recall-Oriented Understudy for
Gisting Evaluation) [69], which measures how much ref-
erence content appears in the candidate; and METEOR
(Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit Order-
ing) [70], which aligns words using exact matches, stem-
ming, and synonyms.
2) Language Model (LM) Based
Metrics consist of Clinical Accuracy (CA) metrics using
RadBERT [71] from CT-CLIP [17], which assesses abnor-
mality detection through F1 scores; and GREEN (Genera-
tive Radiology Report Evaluation and Error Notation) [72],
which identifies and explains clinically significant errors.
We also utilize LLMs as evaluators to assess generated con-
tent. We employed GPT-4o Mini as the evaluator model
using prompt designs from M3D [15] to evaluate gener-
ated reports against ground truth, providing scores from 0-
100 that reflect diagnostic reasoning and contextual accu-
racy. This integrated approach ensures comprehensive as-
sessment across structural, linguistic, and clinical dimen-
sions essential for radiology reporting.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Figure 3. Qualitative comparison of generated radiology reports for a patient with suspected COVID-19 pneumonia comparing previous
works, our proposed model, and ablation studies (Ablation-R2+Mask, Ablation-R2+Attr), Ablation-R2. Text is color-coded to highlight
clinically important findings of ground-truth report (green) and erroneous findings of generated reports (yellow). MedRegion-CT demon-
strates superior performance in both diagnostic accuracy and localization compared to previous works and ablation studies.
4.2. Quantitive and Qualitative Results
Quantitative Results.
In this study, we comparatively
evaluated five models for the radiology report generation
task, including our proposed model (Ours), M3D, Med-
BLIP, RadFM, and CT2Rep.
As shown in Table 1, our
proposed model achieved the highest score among the five
models in BLEU4 (0.290), as well as in CA (0.450) and
GPT-4 score (48.837). These results suggest superior per-
formance not only in lexical and structural similarity to ref-
erence reports but also in accurately conveying clinically
essential information without distortion and minimizing un-
necessary hallucinations. M3D demonstrated relatively sta-
ble performance through pretrained weights and multi-stage
learning, showing competitive values in METEOR (0.497)
and ROUGE-L (0.391). However, its CA and GPT-4 score
were lower than our proposed model, indicating limitations
in fully reflecting clinical accuracy. While both MedBLIP
and RadFM utilize LLMs, MedBLIP, which employs pre-
trained models, exhibited relatively faster and more stable
fine-tuning. Nevertheless, their overall performance did not
match that of M3D or our proposed model. CT2Rep, due to
its complex structure, could not incorporate LLMs and in-
stead used an open-source framework trained from scratch.
As a result, this relatively lightweight model was insuffi-
ciently trained with limited resources, leading to compara-
tively lower scores in most metrics including BLEU4, CA,
and GPT-4 score. Although it achieved the highest Green
Score (0.374), this was identified as a biased result primar-
ily due to overfitting to normal cases, which constitute a
significant proportion of medical datasets. Collectively, our
findings reveal that traditional NLG metrics alone are in-
sufficient for fully measuring the clinical significance and
diverse sentence expressions inherent in medical reports.
The CA metric indicates clinical accuracy, while the GPT-
4 score suggests more flexible contextual understanding
and factual consistency. The fact that our proposed model
demonstrated balanced performance across all metrics un-
derscores its high potential as a report generation model that
accurately conveys key content required in actual medical
environments without distortion.
Qualitative Results. Fig. 3 presents a comparative ex-
ample of automated report generation results based on chest
CT images of a patient with suspected COVID-19 pneumo-
nia. MedRegion-CT accurately identified bilateral GGO le-
sions and explicitly noted the absence of masses or nodules,
thereby minimizing false-positive judgments. Clear perfor-
mance differences among existing models were observed.
M3D partially recognized the presence of diffuse GGO in
bilateral lungs; however, it simultaneously exhibited errors
of excessive localization to the lower lobes and inaccurate
descriptions emphasizing the absence of nodules. MedBLIP
and RadFM lacked specific descriptions of major lesions,
omitting clear mention of GGO. In the case of CT2Rep,
while it mentioned non-specific nodules, it failed to specify
the key characteristic of ground-glass opacity and included
unnecessary or false-positive findings such as emphysema-
tous changes or linear atelectasis, which were inconsistent
with the actual imaging findings.
Based on comprehen-

===== PAGE 8 =====
sive analysis, our proposed model was evaluated to have
enhanced clinical utility by most accurately reflecting clini-
cally important information such as bilateral GGO and min-
imizing unnecessary lesion descriptions. This suggests that
the proposed approach has the potential to generate consis-
tent and reliable automated reports in cases of COVID-19
pneumonia.
4.3. Ablation Study
To evaluate the impact of individual components on the per-
formance of our proposed model, we conducted ablation
studies with various configurations. We experimented with
four ablation variants: Ablation-R2+Mask (using R2 and
masking mechanism), Ablation-R2+Attr (using R2 and at-
tribute attention), Ablation-R2 (using only the R2 compo-
nent), and Ablation-LITA (using LITA method, uniformly
sampling slices for slow tokens, instead of R2). The per-
formance comparison between these variants and our com-
plete model (Ours) is presented in Table 1 and Fig.3. As
shown in Table 1, our complete model (Ours) consistently
outperformed all ablation variants across various evaluation
metrics. The complete model achieved the highest scores
in BLEU-4 (0.290), ROUGE-L (0.375), CA (0.450), and
GPT-4 score (48.837), demonstrating that optimal perfor-
mance is achieved when all proposed components work
synergistically. The Ablation-LITA demonstrated inferior
performance compared to the Ablation-R2 variant across
LM-based evaluation metrics.
These results provide ev-
idence that R2 token pooling offers superior representa-
tional efficiency for volumetric feature extraction compared
to uniform pooling strategies in the context of radiology re-
port generation tasks. Ablation-R2+Mask showed perfor-
mance similar to the complete model in BLEU-4 (0.280),
but recorded slightly lower scores in CA (0.430) and GPT-
4 score (44.457). This suggests that while the combina-
tion of R2 and masking mechanism contributes to struc-
tural accuracy, other components are also important for en-
hancing clinical accuracy. Interestingly, Ablation-R2+Attr
showed a slightly higher value in BLEU-4 (0.293), but
was lower than the complete model in CA (0.425) and
GPT-4 score (47.319).
This indicates that the combina-
tion of R2 and attribute attention may be advantageous
for linguistic accuracy but does not fully guarantee clin-
ical accuracy.
Ablation-R2 exhibited the lowest overall
performance (BLEU-4: 0.261, METEOR: 0.481, ROUGE-
L: 0.345, Green Score: 0.233, CA: 0.405, GPT-4 score:
43.014). This suggests that the R2 component alone has
limitations in generating complex radiological reports with-
out other complementary mechanisms.
Fig.3 presents a
qualitative comparison of reports generated for a COVID-
19 pneumonia case, showing how each model configura-
tion affects the clinical accuracy and comprehensiveness of
the reports. Our complete model (Ours) accurately identi-
fied ”diffuse ground-glass opacity densities” in ”both lungs”
and correctly interpreted it as ”compatible with COVID-
19 pneumonia.” This aligns with the description in the
ground truth report (GT) of ”COVID-19 viral pneumo-
nia” and ”ground-glass opacities in both lungs.” Similarly,
Ablation-R2+Mask identified ”diffuse ground-glass opaci-
ties” in ”both lungs, especially the lower lobes,” but did not
mention an explicit association with COVID-19 pneumonia.
Ablation-R2+Attr identified ”diffuse ground-glass opaci-
ties” in ”bilateral lower to mid lung zones” and interpreted
this as ”COVID-19 viral pneumonia,” but unnecessarily rec-
ommended ”clinical correlation and close follow-up.”. The
most notable difference was observed with Ablation-R2,
which completely failed to identify ground-glass opacities
and instead reported ”normal aeration” and ”no nodules or
infiltrative lesions,” presenting an interpretation entirely dif-
ferent from the actual findings. This severe performance
degradation emphasizes that both Attr and Mask compo-
nents are essential for accurately interpreting radiological
findings.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced MedRegion-CT, a region-
focused MLLM framework for 3D chest CT report
generation. By integrating R2 Token Pooling to balance
global slice coverage with high-resolution local details,
alongside a Mask-Driven Visual Extractor that handles
pseudo-masks of major anatomical structures, our approach
effectively captures both broad volumetric context and
fine-grained regional information. Additionally, extracting
Patient-Specific Attributes—such as organ volumes and
lesion measurements—and converting them into textual
prompts reduces ambiguity and improves clinical rele-
vance.
Experimental results on RadGenome-Chest CT
demonstrate that MedRegion-CT outperforms baselines
not only in linguistic fluency but also in diagnostic fi-
delity,
underscoring the importance of region-centric
cues for accurate and interpretable automated reporting.
We anticipate future work can extend this structured,
region-focused paradigm to other clinical imaging domains
and more complex diagnostic scenarios, thereby further
enhancing the reliability of AI-assisted medical reporting.
References
[1] Shah Hussain, Iqra Mubeen, Niamat Ullah, Syed Shahab
Ud Din Shah, Bakhtawar Abduljalil Khan, Muhammad Za-
hoor, Riaz Ullah, Farhat Ali Khan, and Mujeeb A Sultan.
Modern diagnostic imaging technique applications and risk
factors in the medical field: a review. BioMed research in-
ternational, 2022(1):5164970, 2022. 1
[2] Stacy K Goergen, Felicity J Pool, Tari J Turner, Jane E
Grimm, Mark N Appleyard, Carmel Crock, Michael C Fa-
hey, Michael F Fay, Nicholas J Ferris, Susan M Liew,
et al. Evidence-based guideline for the written radiology re-

===== PAGE 9 =====
port: Methods, recommendations and implementation chal-
lenges. Journal of medical imaging and radiation oncology,
57(1):1–7, 2013. 1
[3] Yann Erick Claessens,
Marie-Pierre Debray,
Florence
Tubach, Anne Laure Brun, Blandine Rammaert, Pierre Haus-
fater, Jean-Marc Naccache, Patrick Ray, Christophe Cho-
quet, Marie France Carette, Charles Mayaud, Catherine Lep-
ort, and Xavier Duval. Early chest computed tomography
scan to assist diagnosis and guide treatment decision for
suspected community-acquired pneumonia. American jour-
nal of respiratory and critical care medicine, 192 8:974–82,
2015. 1
[4] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine
Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Men-
sch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo:
a visual language model for few-shot learning.
Advances
in neural information processing systems, 35:23716–23736,
2022. 1
[5] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi.
Blip-2:
Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with
frozen image encoders and large language models. In In-
ternational conference on machine learning, pages 19730–
19742. PMLR, 2023.
[6] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 36:34892–34916, 2023.
[7] Zhiyu Wu, Xiaokang Chen, Zizheng Pan, Xingchao Liu,
Wen Liu, Damai Dai, Huazuo Gao, Yiyang Ma, Chengyue
Wu, Bingxuan Wang, et al.
Deepseek-vl2: Mixture-of-
experts vision-language models for advanced multimodal
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10302, 2024.
[8] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin
Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun
Tang, et al. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.13923, 2025. 1
[9] S. Kevin Zhou, Hayit Greenspan, Christos Davatzikos,
James S. Duncan, Bram van Ginneken, Anant Madabhushi,
Jerry L Prince, Daniel Rueckert, and Ronald M. Summers. A
review of deep learning in medical imaging: Imaging traits,
technology trends, case studies with progress highlights, and
future promises.
Proceedings of the IEEE, 109:820–838,
2020. 2
[10] Martin J. Willemink, Wojciech A Koszek, Cailin Hardell,
Jie Wu, Dominik Fleischmann, Hugh Harvey, Les R. Folio,
Ronald M. Summers, D. Rubin, and Matthew P. Lungren.
Preparing medical imaging data for machine learning. Radi-
ology, page 192224, 2020. 2
[11] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci,
Sezgin Er,
Furkan Almas,
Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Irem Dogan,
Muhammed Furkan Dasdelen, Bastian Wittmann, Enis Sim-
sar, Mehmet Simsar, et al. A foundation model utilizing chest
ct volumes and radiology reports for supervised-level zero-
shot detection of abnormalities. CoRR, 2024. 2
[12] Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ziheng Zhao, Jiayu Lei,
Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Radgenome-chest
ct: A grounded vision-language dataset for chest ct analysis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16754, 2024. 2, 6
[13] Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and
Weidi Xie. Towards generalist foundation model for radi-
ology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.02463, 2023. 2, 3, 6
[14] Qiuhui Chen and Yi Hong.
Medblip:
Bootstrapping
language-image pre-training from 3d medical images and
texts. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 2404–2420, 2024. 3, 6, 2
[15] Fan Bai, Yuxin Du, Tiejun Huang, Max Q-H Meng, and
Bo Zhao.
M3d: Advancing 3d medical image analysis
with multi-modal large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.00578, 2024. 2, 3, 6
[16] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, and Bjoern Menze.
Ct2rep: Automated radiology report generation for 3d medi-
cal imaging. In International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pages 476–
486. Springer, 2024. 3, 6, 2
[17] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci,
Sezgin Er,
Furkan Almas,
Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Irem Dogan,
Muhammed Furkan Dasdelen, Omer Faruk Durugol, Bastian
Wittmann, Tamaz Amiranashvili, et al. Developing general-
ist foundation models from a multimodal dataset for 3d com-
puted tomography. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17834, 2024.
2, 6
[18] Sedigheh Eslami, Christoph Meinel, and Gerard De Melo.
Pubmedclip: How much does clip benefit visual question
answering in the medical domain?
In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2023, pages
1181–1193, 2023. 2
[19] Fernando P´erez-Garc´ıa, Harshita Sharma, Sam Bond-Taylor,
Kenza Bouzid, Valentina Salvatelli, Maximilian Ilse, Shruthi
Bannur, Daniel C Castro, Anton Schwaighofer, Matthew P
Lungren, et al. Exploring scalable medical image encoders
beyond text supervision. Nature Machine Intelligence, pages
1–12, 2025.
[20] Xinrui Song, Xuanang Xu, and Pingkun Yan. General pur-
pose image encoder dinov2 for medical image registration.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15687, 2024. 2
[21] Liang Chen, Zekun Wang, Shuhuai Ren, Lei Li, Haozhe
Zhao, Yunshui Li, Zefan Cai, Hongcheng Guo, Lei Zhang,
Yizhe Xiong, et al.
Next token prediction towards multi-
modal intelligence: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.18619, 2024. 2
[22] Chunyuan Li, Cliff Wong, Sheng Zhang, Naoto Usuyama,
Haotian Liu, Jianwei Yang, Tristan Naumann, Hoifung Poon,
and Jianfeng Gao. Llava-med: Training a large language-
and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:28541–28564,
2023. 2
[23] Omkar Thawkar, Abdelrahman Shaker, Sahal Shaji Mullap-
pilly, Hisham Cholakkal, Rao Muhammad Anwer, Salman
Khan, Jorma Laaksonen, and Fahad Shahbaz Khan. Xraygpt:
Chest radiographs summarization using medical vision-
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07971, 2023.
[24] Michael Moor, Qian Huang, Shirley Wu, Michihiro Ya-
sunaga, Cyril Zakka, Yashodhara Dalmia, Eduardo Pontes
Reis,
Pranav Rajpurkar,
and Jure Leskovec.
Med-

===== PAGE 10 =====
flamingo: a multimodal medical few-shot learner.
ArXiv,
abs/2307.15189, 2023.
[25] Zhanyu Wang, Lingqiao Liu, Lei Wang, and Luping Zhou.
R2gengpt: Radiology report generation with frozen llms.
Meta-Radiology, 1(3):100033, 2023.
[26] Kai Zhang, Jun Yu, Eashan Adhikarla, Rong Zhou, Zhiling
Yan, Yixin Liu, Zhengliang Liu, Lifang He, Brian Davison,
Xiang Li, et al. Biomedgpt: A unified and generalist biomed-
ical generative pre-trained transformer for vision, language,
and multimodal tasks.
arXiv e-prints, pages arXiv–2305,
2023.
[27] Zhihong Chen, Maya Varma, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Mag-
dalini Paschali, Louis Blankemeier, Dave Van Veen, Jeya
Maria Jose Valanarasu, Alaa Youssef, Joseph Paul Cohen,
Eduardo Pontes Reis, et al.
Chexagent: Towards a foun-
dation model for chest x-ray interpretation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.12208, 2024.
[28] Harshita Sharma, Valentina Salvatelli, Shaury Srivastav,
Kenza Bouzid, Shruthi Bannur, Daniel C Castro, Maximil-
ian Ilse, Sam Bond-Taylor, Mercy Prasanna Ranjit, Fabian
Falck, et al.
Maira-seg: Enhancing radiology report gen-
eration with segmentation-aware multimodal large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11362, 2024. 3, 5
[29] Tao Tu, Shekoofeh Azizi, Danny Driess, Mike Schaeker-
mann, Mohamed Amin, Pi-Chuan Chang, Andrew Carroll,
Charles Lau, Ryutaro Tanno, Ira Ktena, et al. Towards gen-
eralist biomedical ai. Nejm Ai, 1(3):AIoa2300138, 2024.
[30] Yunfei Xie, Ce Zhou, Lang Gao, Juncheng Wu, Xianhang
Li, Hong-Yu Zhou, Sheng Liu, Lei Xing, James Zou, Cihang
Xie, et al. Medtrinity-25m: A large-scale multimodal dataset
with multigranular annotations for medicine. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.02900, 2024. 2
[31] Jason J Lau, Soumya Gayen, Asma Ben Abacha, and Dina
Demner-Fushman. A dataset of clinically generated visual
questions and answers about radiology images.
Scientific
data, 5(1):1–10, 2018. 2
[32] Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Seth J Berkowitz,
Nathaniel R Greenbaum, Matthew P Lungren, Chih-ying
Deng, Roger G Mark, and Steven Horng. Mimic-cxr, a de-
identified publicly available database of chest radiographs
with free-text reports. Scientific data, 6(1):317, 2019.
[33] Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ziheng Zhao, Weixiong Lin,
Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. Pmc-vqa: Vi-
sual instruction tuning for medical visual question answer-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10415, 2023. 2
[34] Che Liu, Zhongwei Wan, Yuqi Wang, Hui Shen, Haozhe
Wang, Kangyu Zheng, Mi Zhang, and Rossella Arcucci.
Benchmarking and boosting radiology report generation
for 3d high-resolution medical images.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07146, 2024. 3
[35] Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Enis Simsar, An-
jany Kumar Sekuboyina, Chinmay Prabhakar, Alperen Tez-
can, Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Furkan Al-
mas, Irem Dougan, Muhammed Furkan Dasdelen, Hadrien
Reynaud, Sarthak Pati, Christian Bluethgen, Mehmet Kemal
Ozdemir, and Bjoern H Menze. Generatect: Text-conditional
generation of 3d chest ct volumes. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, 2023. 3
[36] Changsun Lee, Sangjoon Park, Cheong-Il Shin, Woo Hee
Choi, Hyun Jeong Park, Jeong Eun Lee, and Jong Chul
Ye.
Read like a radiologist:
Efficient vision-language
model for 3d medical imaging interpretation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.13558, 2024. 3
[37] Yiming Shi, Xun Zhu, Ying Hu, Chenyi Guo, Miao Li, and
Ji Wu. Med-2e3: A 2d-enhanced 3d medical multimodal
large language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12783,
2024. 3
[38] De-An Huang, Shijia Liao, Subhashree Radhakrishnan,
Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Zhiding Yu, and Jan Kautz.
Lita: Language instructed temporal-localization assistant.
ArXiv, abs/2403.19046, 2024. 3, 5, 6
[39] Mingze Xu, Mingfei Gao, Zhe Gan, Hong-You Chen,
Zhengfeng Lai, Haiming Gang, Kai Kang, and Afshin De-
hghan. Slowfast-llava: A strong training-free baseline for
video large language models. ArXiv, abs/2407.15841, 2024.
[40] Dabing Cheng, Haosen Zhan, Xingchen Zhao, Guisheng
Liu, Zemin Li, Jinghui Xie, Zhao Song, Weiguo Feng, and
Bingyue Peng. Text-to-edit: Controllable end-to-end video
ad creation via multimodal llms.
ArXiv, abs/2501.05884,
2025. 3
[41] Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Jitendra Malik, and
Kaiming He. Slowfast networks for video recognition. 2019
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 6201–6210, 2018. 3
[42] Shilong Zhang, Pei Sun, Shoufa Chen, Min Xiao, Wenqi
Shao, Wenwei Zhang, Kai Chen, and Ping Luo. Gpt4roi: In-
struction tuning large language model on region-of-interest.
ArXiv, abs/2307.03601, 2023. 3
[43] Chuofan Ma, Yi Jiang, Jiannan Wu, Zehuan Yuan, and Xiao-
juan Qi. Groma: Localized visual tokenization for grounding
multimodal large language models. ArXiv, abs/2404.13013,
2024.
[44] Qiushan Guo, Shalini De Mello, Hongxu Yin, Wonmin
Byeon, Ka Chun Cheung, Yizhou Yu, Ping Luo, and Sifei
Liu. Regiongpt: Towards region understanding vision lan-
guage model. 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 13796–13806,
2024. 3
[45] Xiaoshuang Huang, Haifeng Huang, Lingdong Shen, Yehui
Yang, Fangxin Shang, Junwei Liu, and Jia Liu. A refer-and-
ground multimodal large language model for biomedicine.
In International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention, 2024. 3
[46] Hong-Yu Zhou, Subathra Adithan, Juli´an Nicol´as Acosta,
Eric J. Topol, and Pranav Rajpurkar. A generalist learner
for multifaceted medical image interpretation.
ArXiv,
abs/2405.07988, 2024.
[47] Lehan Wang, Haonan Wang, Honglong Yang, Jiaji Mao, Ze-
hong Yang, Jun Shen, and Xiaomeng Li. Interpretable bilin-
gual multimodal large language model for diverse biomedi-
cal tasks. ArXiv, abs/2410.18387, 2024. 3
[48] Shruthi Bannur, Kenza Bouzid, Daniel C. Castro, Anton
Schwaighofer, Sam Bond-Taylor, Maximilian Ilse, Fernando
P’erez-Garc’ia, Valentina Salvatelli, Harshita Sharma, Fe-
lix Meissen, Mercy Prasanna Ranjit, Shaury Srivastav, Julia

===== PAGE 11 =====
Gong, Fabian Falck, Ozan Oktay, Anja Thieme, Matthew P.
Lungren, Maria Teodora Wetscherek, Javier Alvarez-Valle,
and Stephanie L. Hyland. Maira-2: Grounded radiology re-
port generation. ArXiv, abs/2406.04449, 2024. 3
[49] Tim Tanida, Philip M¨uller, Georgios Kaissis, and Daniel
Rueckert. Interactive and explainable region-guided radiol-
ogy report generation. 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 7433–
7442, 2023. 3
[50] Lin Wang, Munan Ning, Donghuan Lu, Dong Wei, Yefeng
Zheng, and Jie lian Chen. An inclusive task-aware frame-
work for radiology report generation.
In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, 2022. 3
[51] Yuqian Yuan, Wentong Li, Jian Liu, Dongqi Tang, Xinjie
Luo, Chi Qin, Lei Zhang, and Jianke Zhu. Osprey: Pixel un-
derstanding with visual instruction tuning. 2024 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 28202–28211, 2023. 3, 5
[52] Zhixuan Chen, Yequan Bie, Haibo Jin, and Hao Chen. Large
language model with region-guided referring and grounding
for ct report generation. ArXiv, abs/2411.15539, 2024. 3
[53] Ziheng Zhao, Yao Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang,
Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. One model to
rule them all: Towards universal segmentation for medical
images with text prompts. ArXiv, abs/2312.17183, 2023. 3,
6, 2
[54] Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hi-
roaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. Pre-train, prompt, and
predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in nat-
ural language processing. ACM Computing Surveys, 55:1 –
35, 2021. 3
[55] Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Wayne Xin
Zhao, and Ji rong Wen. Evaluating object hallucination in
large vision-language models. In Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. 3
[56] Shengbang Tong, Zhuang Liu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, Yann
LeCun, and Saining Xie.
Eyes wide shut? exploring the
visual shortcomings of multimodal llms. 2024 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 9568–9578, 2024. 3
[57] Ziyuan Qin, Huahui Yi, Qicheng Lao, and Kang Li. Medical
image understanding with pretrained vision language mod-
els: A comprehensive study. ArXiv, abs/2209.15517, 2022.
4
[58] Haibo Jin, Haoxuan Che, Yi-Mou Lin, and Haoxing Chen.
Promptmrg: Diagnosis-driven prompts for medical report
generation. ArXiv, abs/2308.12604, 2023. 4
[59] Zhixuan Chen, Luyang Luo, Yequan Bie, and Hao Chen.
Dia-llama: Towards large language model-driven ct report
generation. ArXiv, abs/2403.16386, 2024. 4
[60] Chun-Hsiao Yeh, Jiayun Wang, Andrew D. Graham, An-
drea J. Liu, Bo Tan, Yubei Chen, Yi Ma, and Meng C. Lin.
Insight: A multi-modal diagnostic pipeline using llms for oc-
ular surface disease diagnosis. ArXiv, abs/2410.00292, 2024.
4, 5
[61] Pedro R.A.S. Bassi, Mehmet Can Yavuz, Kang Wang, Xi-
aoxi Chen, Wenxuan Li, Sergio Decherchi, Andrea Cav-
alli, Yang Yang, Alan L. Yuille, and Zongwei Zhou.
Radgpt: Constructing 3d image-text tumor datasets. ArXiv,
abs/2501.04678, 2025. 4, 5
[62] Peter Andrew Marcovici and George Albert Taylor. Jour-
nal club: Structured radiology reports are more complete
and more effective than unstructured reports. AJR. Ameri-
can journal of roentgenology, 203 6:1265–71, 2014. 5
[63] Lorenzo Cereser, Francesco Cortiula, C. Simiele, Valeria Pe-
ruzzi, Martina Bortolot, Annarita Tullio, Giuseppe Como,
Chiara Zuiani, and Rossano Girometti. Assessing the impact
of structured reporting on learning how to report lung cancer
staging ct: A triple cohort study on inexperienced readers.
European journal of radiology, 171:111291, 2024. 5
[64] Fernando P’erez-Garc’ia, Harshita Sharma, Sam Bond-
Taylor, Kenza Bouzid, Valentina Salvatelli, Maximilian Ilse,
Shruthi Bannur, Daniel C. Castro, Anton Schwaighofer,
Matthew P. Lungren, Maria Teodora Wetscherek, Noel
Codella, Stephanie L. Hyland, Javier Alvarez-Valle, and
Ozan Oktay. Rad-dino: Exploring scalable medical image
encoders beyond text supervision. ArXiv, abs/2401.10815,
2024. 5, 1
[65] Salim Aymeric Si-Mohamed, Mouhamad Nasser, Marion
Colevray, Olivier Nempont, Pierre Lartaud, Anna Sesilia
Vlachomitrou, Thomas Broussaud, Kais Ahmad, Julie Tr-
aclet, Vincent Cottin, and Loic Boussel. Automatic quan-
titative computed tomography measurement of longitudinal
lung volume loss in interstitial lung diseases. European Ra-
diology, 32:4292 – 4303, 2022. 6
[66] Shuai Ming, Wei Yang, Sijia Cui, Shuai Huang, and Xi-
angyang Gong. Consistency of radiologists in identifying
pulmonary nodules based on low-dose computed tomogra-
phy. Journal of thoracic disease, 11 7:2973–2980, 2019. 6
[67] Hans Jonas Meyer, Alina Pfeil, Dominik Schramm, An-
dreas Gunter Bach, and Alexey Surov. Renal incidental find-
ings on computed tomography. Medicine, 96, 2017. 6
[68] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing
Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Pierre Isabelle, Eugene Charniak, and Dekang
Lin, editors, Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, July 2002. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 6
[69] Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation
of summaries. In Text Summarization Branches Out, pages
74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. 6
[70] Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic
metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with hu-
man judgments. In IEEvaluation@ACL, 2005. 6
[71] An Yan, Julian McAuley, Xing Lu, Jiang Du, Eric Y. Chang,
Amilcare Gentili, and Chun-Nan Hsu. Radbert: Adapting
transformer-based language models to radiology. Radiology.
Artificial intelligence, 4 4:e210258, 2022. 6
[72] Sophie Ostmeier, Justin Xu, Zhihong Chen, Maya Varma,
Louis Blankemeier, Christian Bluethgen, Arne Edward

===== PAGE 12 =====
Michalson, Michael E. Moseley, Curtis P. Langlotz, Ak-
shay S. Chaudhari, and Jean-Benoit Delbrouck. Green: Gen-
erative radiology report evaluation and error notation. ArXiv,
abs/2405.03595, 2024. 6
[73] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ee Lacroix, Baptiste
Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aur´elien
Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume
Lample.
Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models. ArXiv, abs/2302.13971, 2023. 2
[74] J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-
Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu Chen.
Lora:
Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
ArXiv,
abs/2106.09685, 2021. 2
[75] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Fixing weight decay reg-
ularization in adam. ArXiv, abs/1711.05101, 2017. 2
[76] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and
Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory optimizations toward training
trillion parameter models. SC20: International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, pages 1–16, 2019. 2

===== PAGE 13 =====
MedRegion-CT: Region-Focused Multimodal LLM for Comprehensive 3D CT
Report Generation
Supplementary Material
1. Patient Attribution Extractor
1: function GET DIAMETER(mask)
2:
mask array ←
3:
sitk.GetArrayFromImage(mask)
4:
labeled mask ←
5:
skimage.measure.label(mask array)
6:
regions ←
7:
skimage.measure.regionprops(labeled mask)
8:
dmts ←∅
9:
for rg in regions do
10:
mnz, mny, mnx, mxz, mxy, mxx ←rg.bbox
11:
dmts.append(
12:
max(mxx-mnx, mxy-mny, mxz-mnz))
13:
end for
14:
return dmts
15: end function
16: function COUNT MASK(mask)
17:
mask array ←
18:
sitk.GetArrayFromImage(mask)
19:
labeled mask ←
20:
skimage.measure.label(mask array)
21:
num objects ←max(labeled mask)
22:
return num objects
23: end function
24: for organ = [Lung, Heart, Liver, Kidney . . .] do
25:
volume ←sitk.GetArrayFromImage(organ).sum()
26: end for
27: for legion = [Nodule, Cyst, Effusion, . . .] do
28:
count ←COUNT MASK(legion)
29:
diameter ←GET DIAMETER(legion)
30:
location ←Filter by mask filename
31: end for
Figure 4. This code employs a deterministic algorithm to compute
the volumes of multiple anatomical structures (e.g., lungs, liver, le-
sions) and to estimate the diameter of various pathological findings
(e.g., nodules, cysts). The GET DIAMETER function determines
the dimensional parameters of each lesion from the labeled masks.
2. Training and Implementation
Training. We preprocess the 3D CT images using consis-
tent min-max normalization and resize the 3D images to
Figure 5. The black text contains image information derived from
CT slices, the blue text indicates region-specific segmentation to-
kens labeled as <region i >. The green text comprises attribute
information extracted from (a), encompassing clinically relevant
quantitative data. This text offers a structured presentation of vol-
umes, counts, and locations of major organs and lesions identified
in the medical scan. Based on these details, prompts can be pro-
vided for six distinct regions to generate corresponding clinical
findings.
256 × 256 × 32 for input. We utilize RAD-DINO as our
vision encoder and leverage its pre-trained image encoder
checkpoint[64]. The vision encoder remains frozen during
MLLM training. For the Multimodal Connector, we use a
linear layer. For the generation of pseudo-masks, we used

===== PAGE 14 =====
the SAT [53] to extract major lesion and anatomical masks
when unavailable. After R2 token pooling, the final 356 vi-
sion tokens are fed into the LLM. We utilize LLaMA3-8B
[73] as our LLM base model and load its pre-trained param-
eters. The MLLM training consists of two steps. Initially,
we froze the vision encoder and LLM while fine-tuning the
Multimodal Connector with an image-report dataset, apply-
ing a batch size of 4 × 8, learning rate of 10−4, 3 epochs,
with warmup and cosine decay. Subsequently, we fine-tune
the Multimodal Connector, LLM, and segmentation module
with structured report dataset, applying a batch size of 1 ×
8, learning rate of 2 × 10−5, 3 epochs, with warmup and
cosine decay. For LLM fine-tuning, we consistently apply
the parameter-efficient LoRA [74] method, with LoRA pa-
rameters set to r = 16, α= 32, and a dropout ratio of 0.1. The
maximum sequence length for the LLM is set to 2,048. All
models are trained using the AdamW [75] optimizer, and to
optimize the training process, we leverage ZeRO [76] stage
2. The implementation is performed in PyTorch, and train-
ing is conducted in parallel on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with
80GB memory.
Comparison. For baseline comparisons, we compare
three state-of-the-art open-source 3D methods capable of
generating CT reports:
RadFM [13], Med-BLIP [14],
CT2Rep [16], and M3D [15].
To maintain consistency
across methods, we used LLaMA3-8B [73] as the language
decoder for all comparison methods. The input volumes are
resized to 256 × 256 × 32. Each compared model is either
trained from scratch for models without pre-trained weights
or initialized with pre-trained weights and further fine-tuned
on the CT report generation dataset for models with pre-
trained weights. Given resource limitations and to ensure
a fair comparison, all experimental settings were controlled
with a time constraint of 48 hours using two A100 GPUs
for each experiment.
