
===== PAGE 1 =====
Towards a Visual-Language Foundation Model for
Computational Pathology
Ming Y. Lu1,2,3,4,6‡, Bowen Chen1,2‡, Drew F. K. Williamson1,2,3‡, Richard J. Chen1,2,3,4,5, Ivy Liang1,8, Tong
Ding1, Guillaume Jaume1,2,3,4, Igor Odintsov1, Andrew Zhang1,2,3,4,7, Long Phi Le2,7, Georg Gerber1, Anil V
Parwani9, Faisal Mahmood∗1,2,3,4,5,10
1Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
2Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
3Cancer Program, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA
4Cancer Data Science Program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
5Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
6Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA
7Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard-MIT, Cambridge, MA
8Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering And Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
9Department of Pathology, Wexner Medical Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
10Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
‡ Contributed Equally
*Corresponding author: Faisal Mahmood (faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu)
The accelerated adoption of digital pathology and advances in deep learning have enabled the devel-
opment of powerful models for various pathology tasks across a diverse array of diseases and patient
cohorts1–13. However, model training is often difficult due to label scarcity in the medical domain and
the model’s usage is limited by the specific task and disease for which it is trained1–3,14,15. Addition-
ally, most models in histopathology leverage only image data, a stark contrast to how humans teach
each other and reason about histopathologic entities. We introduce CONtrastive learning from Cap-
tions for Histopathology (CONCH), a visual-language foundation model developed using diverse sources
of histopathology images, biomedical text, and notably over 1.17 million image-caption pairs via task-
agnostic pretraining. Evaluated on a suite of 13 diverse benchmarks, CONCH can be transferred to
a wide range of downstream tasks involving either or both histopathology images and text, achieving
state-of-the-art performance on histology image classification, segmentation, captioning, text-to-image
and image-to-text retrieval. CONCH represents a substantial leap over concurrent visual-language pre-
trained systems for histopathology, with the potential to directly facilitate a wide array of machine
learning-based workflows requiring minimal or no further supervised fine-tuning.
1
arXiv:2307.12914v2  [cs.CV]  25 Jul 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
Introduction
The gold standard for the diagnosis of many diseases remains the examination of tissue by a pathol-
ogist. The recent rise of computational pathology (CPath)16, which leverages artificial intelligence (AI) to
solve problems in pathology, has demonstrated considerable advances across many tasks including metastasis
detection1–3,17, cancer subtyping4,5, survival prediction6–8,18,19, unknown primary origin site prediction9,10, im-
age search11–13, and mutation prediction20,21, among other tasks22–30. Additionally, current strides in the field
are made under the paradigm of developing models targeting specific tasks using large cohorts of labeled train-
ing examples, such as in lymph node metastasis detection1–3,17 and prostate cancer grading14,15. However, the
process of data collection and annotation of whole slide images (WSIs) is labor-intensive and is not scalable to
open-set recognition problems or rare diseases, both of which are common to the practice of pathology. With
thousands of possible diagnoses and many other tasks, training separate models for every step of the pathology
workflow is untenable. Additionally, as diverse as these tasks are, they are all analyses of visual data or include
other structured information such as “omics“20,31–39 and other multimodal data sources 40–44. However, the
practice of pathology and the communication of pathological findings make extensive use of natural language,
be it in the form of the report that the pathologist prepares for the patient and their treating clinician, the journal
article that details a new histopathologic entity, or the textbook chapter that teaches residents how to practice
pathology.
The general machine learning community has made immense strides in foundation models that utilize
both visual and language information. Representative works such as CLIP45, ALIGN46, and CoCa47, among
others48–59 use large-scale image-caption pairs to pretrain visual-language foundation models—task-agnostic
pretrained models that demonstrate robust performance in downstream vision and visual-language tasks. In the
broader biomedical imaging domain, visual-language data have been leveraged for a variety of tasks including
X-ray report generation60–64, zero-shot classification65–69, retrieval66,67,69–71, among others72–76. However, the
number of works integrating vision and language data for representation learning in CPath is small, with
recent works68,77–80 demonstrating the potential of using paired image-caption data to learn meaningful visual
representations and to develop foundation models for histopathology that can transfer to multiple downstream
tasks in a zero-shot setting, i.e., using no task-specific training data. However, these works68,77,79 are limited
in the scale of histopathology-specific pretraining data due to the lack of readily-available image-caption pairs
in this domain, leading to limited practical utility from relatively poor performance. Additionally, the broader
capabilities of these models remain underexplored.
Given the diversity of tasks, the difficulty in acquiring large datasets of rare diseases or combinations of
findings, and the central nature of language to the practice of pathology, there is a need for 1) high-performing
visual-language foundation models that leverage large-scale pretraining and generalize well across tasks and
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
2) extensive study on the wide range of potential applications of these models in order to understand their
utilities and limitations. We introduce CONtrastive learning from Captions for Histopathology (CONCH),
a visual-language foundation model developed using diverse sources of histopathology images, biomedical
text, and over 1.17 million image caption pairs (Figure 1a-c, Extended Data Figure 1) via task-agnostic
pretraining with the aim to address these unfilled needs. Based on CoCa47, a state-of-the-art visual-language
foundation pretraining framework, CONCH utilizes an image encoder, a text encoder, and a multimodal fusion
decoder, and is trained via a combination of contrastive alignment objectives that seek to align the image
and text modalities in the model’s representation space and a captioning objective that learns to predict the
caption corresponding to an image (Figure 1d). We investigate the capabilities of CONCH on a wide array of
tasks, including classification of image tiles and gigapixel WSIs, cross-modal image-to-text and text-to-image
retrieval, image segmentation, and image captioning in a total of thirteen diverse benchmarks. We demonstrate
that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance across all benchmarks relative to other visual-language
foundation models (Figure 1e), including PLIP77, BiomedCLIP68, OpenAICLIP45 and outperforms concurrent
baselines often by a large margin (Figures 2-6).
Results
Zero-shot classification of diverse tissues and diseases
Contrastively-aligned visual-language pretraining allows the model to be directly applied to downstream classi-
fication tasks without requiring further labeled examples for supervised learning or finetuning. This zero-shot
transfer capability allows a single pretrained foundation model to be applied off-the-shelf to many differ-
ent downstream datasets with arbitrarily many classes compared with the current paradigm of training a new
model for every new task. Given a task, we first represent the set of class or category names using a set of pre-
determined text prompts where each prompt corresponds to a class. An image is then classified by matching it
with the most similar text prompt in the model’s shared image-text representation space (Figure 2a, see Meth-
ods for details). In practice, there are often multiple ways to phrase the same concept in text (e.g. “invasive
lobular carcinoma of the breast” and “breast ILC”) so we ensemble multiple text prompts for each class during
prediction, which was found to generally boost predictive performance compared to using a single text prompt
(Extended Data Figure 2). Additionally, while previous works68,77 primarily focused on classification tasks
at the region-of-interest (ROI) level, we also investigate the zero-shot capability of our model on gigapixel
whole slide images (WSIs) by leveraging MI-Zero79, which divides a WSI into smaller tiles and subsequently
aggregates individual tile-level scores into a slide-level prediction (Figure 2b).
In total, we evaluate on four slide-level classification tasks: TCGA BRCA (invasive breast carcinoma
subtyping), TCGA NSCLC (non-small cell lung cancer subtyping), TCGA RCC (renal cell carcinoma sub-
typing), and DHMC LUAD (lung adenocarcinoma histologic pattern classification) and three ROI-level tasks:
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Figure 1: Data curation and model schematic. Caption on next page.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
(Previous page.) Figure 1: Data curation and model schematic. a. Automated data cleaning pipeline. Ed-
ucational sources (EDU) and parts of the PubMed Central Open Access Dataset (PMC OA) were manually
cleaned and used to train an object detector to detect histopathology images, a language model to split captions
referring to multiple images, and a matching model to match detected images to their corresponding captions.
The cleaning process yields a dataset of 1.79 million image-text pairs, which we then filter out pairs referring
to non-humans to create our CONCH (human-only) pretraining dataset of 1.17 million. See Methods for de-
tails on data cleaning and Extended Data Figure 9 on performance comparisons using different variations of
the pretraining dataset. b. Estimated distribution of image-text pairs in the human-only pretraining dataset by
topic. Note that pretraining data covers a diverse range of pathology topics. Inset compares distribution of
caption lengths between PMC-Path and EDU. See Extended Data Figure 1 for wordclouds of captions from
each category. c. Visual-language pretraining setup. CONCH consists of an image encoder, a text encoder,
and a multimodal text decoder. The pretraining process uses both contrastive and captioning objectives. The
contrastive objectives align the image and text encoders by maximizing the cosine-similarity scores between
paired image and text embeddings while the captioning objective maximizes the likelihood of generating the
correct text conditioned on the image and previously generated text. See Methods for details. d. Radarplot
comparing performance of CONCH and baselines on various downstream tasks. CONCH outperforms base-
lines by a significant margin on a diverse set of tasks spanning classification, retrieval, and segmentation. See
Results for detailed descriptions of each task and metrics.
CRC100k (colorectal cancer tissue classification), WSSS4LUAD (lung adenocarcinoma tissue classification),
and SICAP (Gleason pattern classification). We use balanced accuracy as the primary evaluation metric for
TCGA NSCLC, TCGA RCC, TCGA LUAD, CRC100k and WSSS4LUAD, which accounts for class imbal-
ance by weighing the accuracy score of each class equally. Following the community standard, we use Cohen’s
κ and quadratic weighted Cohen’s κ as primary metrics for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) pattern classification
and Gleason pattern classification respectively, as they are regarded as more subjective tasks, which typically
translates to higher inter-rater variability. We refer readers to Extended Data Tables 1-14 for more detailed
reporting of model performance and Methods for detailed descriptions of evaluation datasets.
On slide-level benchmarks, CONCH outperforms state-of-the-art visual-language foundation models
(PLIP, BiomedCLIP, and OpenAICLIP) on all tasks, often by a wide margin (Figure 2c). For instance, for
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) subtyping and renal cell carcinoma (RCC) subtyping, CONCH achieves
a zero-shot accuracy of 90.0% and 89.3% respectively, and outperforms the next best performing model, PLIP,
by 11.3% and 8.9% on each task with p < 0.01 via two-sided paired permutation test (see Statistical analysis).
On the more difficult invasive breast carcinoma (BRCA) subtyping task, CONCH achieves a zero-shot accuracy
of 84.0% while other models perform near random chance at between 50.7% (PLIP) to 55.3% (BiomedCLIP),
nearly 30% (p < 0.01) lower than CONCH. Similarly, on the more challenging LUAD pattern classifica-
tion task, CONCH achieved a κ score of 0.236, almost 0.16 higher than the next highest performing model,
PLIP (p = 0.014). On ROI-level benchmarks, we observe similar findings, where CONCH achieves a zero-
shot quadratic κ of 0.711 on SICAP (outperforming BiomedCLIP by 0.158, p < 0.01), a zero-shot accuracy
of 79.1% on CRC100k (outperforming PLIP by 11.7%, p < 0.01) and a zero-shot accuracy of 71.9% on
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
WSSS4LUAD (outperforming PLIP by 9.5%, p < 0.01). These results demonstrate that in addition to achiev-
ing more accurate predictions on relatively easy tasks, CONCH is still able to achieve meaningful predictions
on more challenging tasks where other models may potentially struggle to outperform random chance.
When classifying a WSI using zero-shot transfer, in addition to computing an aggregated, slide-level
prediction, we can also create a heatmap to visualize the cosine-similarity score between each tile in the slide
and the text prompt corresponding the predicted class label. Regions with high similarity scores are deemed
by the model to be close matches with the diagnosis (e.g. invasive ductal carcinoma, IDC) while regions with
low similarity scores do not match the diagnosis (Figure 2e). In an example of breast IDC slide, we find that
regions highlighted in the heatmap closely resemble the tumor regions as delineated by pathologist annotation
(Figure 2e, left and middle). Since the slide-level prediction score is a simple average of the similarity scores
of the top-K tiles for a given class, the heatmap enables human interpretability by directly highlighting regions
involved in the model’s decision making process, which can be displayed in high resolution to the human user
for inspection (Figure 2e, center). Additional examples are visualized in Extended Data Figure 3-5. These
findings suggest the possibility of using the zero-shot recognition ability of our model for coarse-grained tissue
segmentation on WSIs, which we quantitatively evaluate in the Zero-shot segmentation section.
Few-shot classification with task-specific supervised learning
The zero-shot recognition capability of contrastive pretrained visual-language models for histopathology en-
ables efficient and expedited application of a single foundation model to a potentially wide range of tasks
without going through the laborious processes of training data collection, annotation, and supervised model
training for each new task. Sometimes however, it may still be desirable to specialize the model with labeled
training examples in order to maximize performance for a given task, ideally using as few labels as possible.
In this section, we investigate the label efficiency in using the pretrained representation of the image encoder
backbone of the visual-language foundation models for task-specific supervised classification. For each bench-
mark using supervised training, we either use the official training set (if provided) or remaining cases from the
dataset after holding out the set of cases used for zero-shot evaluation (see Downstream evaluation datasets).
For slide-level tasks, we train weakly-supervised classification models using slide-level labels based on the
widely used Attention-based multiple instance learning algorithm81. For ROI-level tasks, we use logistic re-
gression on top of the global (e.g. <CLS> token) representation of each encoder, a practice commonly known
as linear probing. In addition to PLIP, BiomedCLIP, and OpenAICLIP encoders, we add additional baselines
for comparison: for slide-level tasks, given its popularity, ResNet5082 (truncated after the third residual block)
pretrained on ImageNet83; and for ROI-level tasks, CTransPath84—a state of the art self-supervised pretrained
histopathology image encoder (see Methods for details).
On the slide-level tasks (Figure 2d, left), CONCH achieves a balanced accuracy score of 84.7%, 94.2%
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Figure 2: Zero-shot and supervised classification. a. Schematic of zero-shot classification using a pair
of contrastively aligned image and text encoders. A prompt is constructed for each class, and the image is
classified according to the prompt whose embedding is closest to that of the image in the shared embedding
space. b. Zero-shot classification of WSIs. Each WSI is divided into tiles and processed as in a. The similarity
scores for tiles are aggregated using top-K pooling to form slide-level similarity scores, the highest of which
corresponds to the slide-level prediction. In c, d, dashed lines represent the average over tasks. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. c. Zero-shot performance on downstream subtyping (TCGA BRCA,
n = 150; TCGA RCC, n = 225; TCGA NSCLC, n = 150; DHMC LUAD, n = 143; CRC100k, n = 7, 180;
WSSS4LUAD, n = 4, 693) and grading (SICAP, n = 2, 122) tasks. Cohen’s κ is reported for DHMC LUAD
and quadratically weighted Cohen’s κ is reported for SICAP, while balanced accuracy is reported for all other
tasks. Additional metrics are reported in Extended Data Tables 1-7. d. Supervised evaluation of embeddings
of each model. Linear probing is used for ROI-level tasks (CRC100k and SICAP) while ABMIL is used for
slide-level tasks, with the same metrics reported as in c.. See Extended Data Tables 15-19 for more detailed
results. e. From left to right: pathologist-annotated invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), corresponding heatmap,
and selected tiles at higher power. Heatmap is colored based on cosine-similarity score between each tile within
the slide and the text prompt corresponding the predicted class label. We find excellent agreement between the
annotated image and high-similarity regions, with the tiles demonstrating classic IDC morphology within the
high-similarity regions and stroma or other normal constituents of the breast in the low similarity regions.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
and 92.7% on BRCA subtyping, RCC subtyping and NSCLC subtyping respectively, outperforming the com-
monly used ResNet50 ImageNet baseline by 8.0%, 4.9% and 8.7% respectively (p = 0.027, p < 0.01 and
p = 0.033). Overall, CONCH obtained an average accuracy of 90.5 % across the three tasks vs. PLIP and
BiomedCLIP at 86.6% and 87.9% respectively, but no statistical significance was detected for each task. In
the ROI-level tasks (Figure 2d, right), CONCH performs nearly identically as the state-of-the-art CTransPath
encoder (93.0% vs. 93.8% balanced accuracy on CRC100k and 0.846 vs. 0.835 quadratic weighted κ on
SICAP), while outperforming PLIP, BiomedCLIP and OpenAICLIP by between by 3.4% and 5.1% in bal-
anced accuracy on CRC100k and between 0.084 and 0.142 in quadratic weighted κ on SICAP (p < 0.01 for
all comparisons). These results demonstrate that overall, CONCH provides a strong image encoder that either
performs comparably to or better than all visual encoders tested, including the self-supervised state-of-the-art
method. See Extended Data Tables 15-19 for detailed reporting of model performance.
Next we investigate the label efficiency of different visual-language pretrained encoders in the few-shot
setting where we vary the number of training labels per class (nc), for nc = 1, 2, 4, 8 . . . up to 512 per class
or until we reach the maximum number of available labels in the training set. In the few shot setting, for each
experiment, we sample 5 different sets of training examples and show their individual performance via boxplot
to account for the high variance in model performance when performing supervised learning with very few
training examples (Figure 3 and Extended Data Figure 6). We first observe that CONCH achieves better
performance (in terms of median accuracy of 5 runs) than other encoders for all sizes of training set and for
all tasks, which translates to requiring fewer labels to achieve the same performance. For instance in BRCA
subtyping, using the CONCH encoder and 8 training labels per class outperforms using PLIP, BiomedCLIP
or OpenAICLIP with 64 labels per class, representing an 8× reduction in training set size—a trend we also
observe for most tasks tested. Additionally, we note that the zero-shot performance of CONCH is highly
competitive when compared to few-shot supervised learning. Aside from relatively easy tasks such as RCC
subtyping and CRC tissue classification, CONCH zero-shot in fact outperforms PLIP and BiomedCLIP-based
supervised learning in BRCA subtyping (up to 64 labels per class), NSCLC subtyping (up to 128 labels per
class), and Gleason grading (up to 16 labels per class for PLIP and 64 labels per class for BiomedCLIP).
These findings suggest that the zero-shot capability of a good visual-language foundation model should not
be trivialized and in fact can serve as a very good baseline when evaluating the performance of task-specific
diagnostic models trained with supervised learning. On the other hand, the zero-shot capability of previous
visual-language foundation models (i.e. PLIP and BiomedCLIP) can be easily surpassed by the CONCH
encoder and supervised learning using just a few examples (1 label per class for BRCA subtyping and CRC
tissue classification, 4 for RCC subtyping, NSCLC subtyping, and Gleason grading).
Zero-shot cross-modal retrieval
By learning an aligned latent space for visual and language embeddings, our model is capable of cross-modal
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Figure 3: Slide-level few-shot classification experiments. We investigate the label efficiency of different
visual-language pretrained encoders in the few-shot setting where we vary the number of training labels per
class (nc), for nc = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 . . . until we reach the maximum number of available labels in the training
set. For each nc, we sample 5 different sets of training examples and train a weakly-supervised ABMIL
model on each training set using slide-level labels (see Supervised classification experiments for details).
We show their individual model performance via boxplot (i.e., n = 5 for each box) to study the variance in
model performance when performing supervised learning with very few training examples. Boxes indicate
quartile values and whiskers extend to data points within 1.5× the interquartile range. For reference, the zero-
shot performance of each model is shown as a dotted line on the same plot. In terms of few-shot supervised
learning, CONCH achieves better performance (i.e. in terms of the median accuracy of 5 runs) than other
encoders for different sizes of training set and for all tasks. Additionally, CONCH zero-shot performance is
surprisingly competitive, outperforming PLIP, BiomedCLIP, and OpenAICLIP few-shot up to 64 labels per
class in the case of BRCA and NSCLC subtyping.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Figure 4: Zero-shot Cross-Modal Retrieval. a. Model performance in cross-modal retrieval was evaluated
on 3 datasets of image-text pairs (Source A, n = 797; Source B, n = 1, 755; TCGA-LUAD, n = 1, 65).
Similarity in the embedding space is computed between the query image with all text samples in the database.
The top-K most similar texts are retrieved. We report Recall@K for K ∈{1, 5, 10} as well as the Mean Recall,
which averages over K. We show both text-to-image (top row) and image-to-text (bottom row) retrieval for
each retrieval task (columns). The rightmost column reports the average across tasks for each metric. CONCH
outperforms other baselines on all retrieval tasks. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. b. Schematic
for zero-shot image-to-text retrieval (text-to-image is analogous). c. Examples of images in top-5 retrieved
results from TCGA LUAD using LUAD-relevant queries with cosine-similarity scores shown in top-right
corner. Examples for other datasets using more diverse queries are shown in Extended Data Figure 7. In
general, we find the images retrieved by the model match what is described in the text prompt.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
retrieval in a zero-shot setting, i.e., retrieving the corresponding text entry based on an image query (image-to-
text, abbreviated as “i2t”), or vice versa (text-to-image, abbreviated as “t2i”). This task naturally lends itself to
image search applications, which are useful in the biomedical domain for applications such as identifying cases
for inclusion in research cohorts or clinical trials, assistance with rare disease presentations or morphologies,
and collecting cases for or helping to create educational resources. To perform text-to-image retrieval (the
image-to-text direction is analogous), we use the text encoder to embed a text input that serves as a query. We
then use the query text embedding to retrieve similar images in the latent space (Figure 4b).
We evaluate our model on three image-caption datasets, Source A and Source B (both are held-out
sources from scraping that cover a diverse range of general pathology concepts) and TCGA LUAD (a much
more specific dataset of tiles extracted from LUAD slides in TCGA and annotated with captions in house).
Following previous works46,68,77, we use Recall@K as the metric for cross-modal retrieval. See the Methods
section for more detailed descriptions of retrieval datasets.
On average over the three datasets, CONCH significantly outperforms baselines by a large margin,
achieving mean recall for text-to-image retrieval of 44.0% and outperforms the next best model, Biomed-
CLIP, by 17.3% with p < 0.01 via two-sided paired permutation test (Figure 4a). For Source A and Source B,
CONCH achieves mean recall for text-to-image retrieval of 68.8% and 39.0% respectively, outperforming the
second highest model, BiomedCLIP, by 31.5% and 15.1% (p < 0.01 for both). For TCGA LUAD, CONCH
achieves text-to-image mean recall of 24.0%, outperforming the next best model, BiomedCLIP, by 5.3% but
with no statistical significance (p = 0.22). However, CONCH outperforms PLIP and OpenAICLIP signifi-
cantly (p < 0.01). Image-to-text retrieval for all three datasets follows the same trend as text-to-image retrieval
in terms of performance and statistical significance, except for TCGA LUAD where the gap for CONCH and
BiomedCLIP is slightly smaller (1.6%). We refer readers to Extended Data Tables 20-25 for more detailed
reporting of model performance. Based on these results, CONCH is able to perform more accurate cross-modal
retrieval compared to baselines.
Aside from using the paired captions as queries, we also show examples of retrieved results using
CONCH with simple text prompts of concepts related to LUAD (e.g., “solid pattern lung adenocarcinoma”)
on the TCGA LUAD dataset (Figure 4c) and general pathology concepts (e.g., “melanoma”) on Source A
and Source B (Extended Data Figure 7a-b). To provide examples from more complex text queries, such as
“cribriform prostatic adenocarcinoma” or “IDH wildtype glioma”, we used a highly diverse dataset of 321,261
tiles sampled from 1,620 cases held-out during pretraining, spanning 108 OncoTree85 codes (Extended Data
Figure 7c). However, as this dataset does not have paired text data, we were not able to quantify the retrieval
performance. The presented examples are confirmed by a pathologist to represent the text query closely.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Figure 5: Zero-shot Segmentation. a. Schematic illustrating zero-shot segmentation on WSIs (or large tissue
sections). To perform segmentation, we divide each WSI into tiles and use zero-shot classification to predict the
label of each tile. The tile-level predictions are stitched together to form the predicted segmentation mask. b-c.
Zero-shot segmentation performance of CONCH and baselines on SICAP (n = 31) and DigestPath (n = 250)
dataset respectively. The macro-averaged Dice score, precision and recall are reported. Error bars represent
95% confidence intervals. d-e. Example of CONCH segmentation prediction on WSIs. Left panel shows
ground truth and right panel shows predicted segmentation mask, with example regions enlarged. Red and
blue indicate tumor and normal tissue respectively. In general, in these examples, CONCH displays excellent
sensitivity to tumor regions with slightly lower specificity, though most of the regions that CONCH segments
as tumor which are in fact non-tumor are adjacent to cancerous glands or contain cancer-associated stroma for
both SICAP and DigestPath.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Zero-shot segmentation
While WSIs can be gigapixels in size, they are generally heterogeneous, with diverse cell types, morpholo-
gies, and tissue architectures represented, each often comprising a small share of the slide. Consequently,
segmentation on the slide level is a difficult and useful task to identify distinct regions of a WSI based on
characteristics of interest and can reduce the number of tiles needed for downstream applications. However,
since annotated data at the sub-slide level is expensive and laborious to collect, a general model capable of
performing slide-level segmentation in a zero-shot setting is valuable. In this work, we explore the possibility
of performing coarse-grained tissue segmentation on WSIs without labeled examples but instead directly using
the aforementioned demonstrated zero-shot retrieval and classification capabilities of our model.
Given a WSI, we divide the tissue regions into into smaller image tiles and pose a given segmentation
task as classifying each tile using zero-shot classification, and assigning the predicted class label to all pixels
in the tile, performed for all tiles. To minimize sharp transition in predicted values for pixels at the boundary
of neighboring tiles, we tile the WSIs with a 75% overlap and average the prediction scores in overlapped
regions in order to achieve a smoother appearance in the predicted segmentation map. We evaluate our model
on SICAP for prostate tumor vs. normal tissue segmentation and on DigestPath for malignant vs. benign tissue
segmentation in colorectal cancer specimens. We report dice score, precision, and recall for each task against
ground truth pixel-level annotations, with scores macro-averaged over all images in each dataset (see Methods
for more details). We refer the reader to Extended Data Tables 26-27 for more detailed results of model
performance.
CONCH outperforms other models in both tasks (Figure 5a, c). In SICAP, CONCH achieves a average
dice score of 0.601 (PLIP: 0.549, p = 0.08 and BiomedCLIP: 0.484, p < 0.01), an average recall score of 0.751
(PLIP: 0.644, p < 0.01, BiomedCLIP: 0.557, p < 0.01), and an average precision core of 0.672 (PLIP: 0.605,
p = 0.024, BiomedCLIP: 0.536, p < 0.01). In DigestPath, CONCH achieves a average dice score of 0.569
(PLIP: 0.374, p < 0.01 and BiomedCLIP: 0.408, p < 0.01), an average recall score of 0.684 (PLIP: 0.513,
p < 0.01, BiomedCLIP: 0.576, p < 0.01), and an average precision core of 0.644 (PLIP: 0.495, p = 0.024,
BiomedCLIP: 0.559, p < 0.01). Additionally, we find that despite the coarse-grained and zero-shot nature
of the approach, the model was able to produce reasonably accurate pixel-level segmentation masks in some
instances, as visualized in Figure 5b, d.
Captioning
Image captioning has been a widely explored task in the general visual-language domain56,86,87. On top of
distilling a top-level diagnosis of the image, image captioning can potentially provide morphological and con-
textual details as well as additional interpretability, offering a much richer set of information than discrete
labels. While prior works68,77,79 in visual-language pretraining have shown applications in classification and
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
Figure 6: Captioning. a. Captioning performance of CONCH and baselines fine-tuned on Source A (train
n = 558, validation n = 77, test n = 162). The METEOR and ROUGE metrics are both calculated to
evaluate the quality of generated captions. Captions were generated using top-K sampling with K = 50 as
the decoding strategy. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. b. Examples of captions generated by
CONCH considered by a pathologist to be high quality. The green text boxes show generated captions and
gray text boxes show ground truth captions. c. An example of an incorrect caption generated by CONCH.
Though the diagnosis and description is incorrect, the image does resemble clear cell renal cell carcinoma
or adipose tissue with fat necrosis at low resolution upon review by a pathologist, indicating that CONCH is
able to recognize some features shared by these disparate diseases (incorrect but reasonable text highlighted in
blue).
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
retrieval, they are not equipped with generative capabilities. By adding a generative loss along with alignment
and a text encoder module using the CoCa framework, our model is augmented with the ability to generate text
conditioned on image inputs. We explore the captioning capabilities of CONCH, laying down the first work to
explore image captioning using a vision language foundation model in the histopathology domain.
For this task, we use image-caption pairs extracted from a held-out source, Source A, where a board
certified pathologist manually reviewed and condensed each caption such that it retains only information that
can be inferred from the image, including the top-level diagnosis and detailed morphological descriptions.
Given that our pretraining data is far from the scale of high quality zero-shot captioning, we perform finetuning
on the dataset. We partition the dataset into training, validation, and testing splits and fine-tune CONCH
and baselines. We refer the reader to Methods for more details on the dataset and finetuning. Since PLIP
and BiomedCLIP are not readily adaptable to captioning tasks, we compare against a GenerativeImage2Text
(GIT)86, a widely-used family of open-source visual language pretrained models for image captioning. To
measure the quality of generated captions, we report METEOR and ROUGE, two widely used metrics used
for image captioning.
On the captioning task (Figure 6a), CONCH achieves a METEOR score of 0.193 and a ROUGE score
of 0.215, outperforming all baselines (GIT-base: METEOR 0.122, ROUGE 0.135 and GIT-large: METEOR
0.125, ROUGE 0.153) with p < 0.01. Although our absolute performance on these metrics is not ideal,
image captioning is a considerably more difficult task than classification and retrieval, and we show that our
pretraining data and approach can significantly improve performance over general visual-language models.
While we find that our model is able to generate captions that strongly relate to the contents of image inputs
(See Figure 6b-c for examples), we noticed that some of the generated captions are regurgitated verbatim from
the training dataset, likely due to the limited scale of fine-tuning (training split n = 558). Given that our current
pretraining scale is still relatively small compared to works in the general visual-language domain, we expect
the fine-tuned captioning performance to improve and potentially even achieve quality zero-shot captioning.
Our work makes one of the first strides in this underexplored direction in histopathology. We refer the reader
to Extended Data Table 28 for more detailed reporting of model performance.
Discussion
Most previous works in computational pathology have attempted to extract meaningful patterns and discrim-
inative signals from image data and/or structured patient data such as genomics and have ignored the textual
aspect of pathology. However, these approaches leave on the table a huge amount of information present in
descriptions of images, information that allows pathology trainees to generalize from a few exemplar images
of an entity to images in the real world that are often significantly more diverse. While recent works have
attempted to leverage image and caption data from social media or biomedical research articles to build visual-
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
language foundation models applicable to the domain of histopathology, we found across a number of tasks that
both their zero-shot and supervised classification performance remain limited, hindering their practical value
as general purpose recognition or retrieval systems for histpathology. Additionally, beyond working on small
ROIs, the models’ abilities to perform in more complex settings (e.g. classification or tumor segmentation on
heterogeneous gigapixel WSIs) remain underexplored.
In this study, we demonstrated that by using the current largest histopathology-specific, paired image-text
dataset of over 1.17 million examples for task-agnostic pretraining, we can build a high-performance visual-
language foundation model that can then demonstrate utility in a wide range of clinically-relevant downstream
tasks from classification, retrieval, segmentation to captioning. Our model is equipped with strong zero-shot
recognition capabilities out of the box, which can potentially relieve the burden of annotating training examples
for many specific classification tasks, as we demonstrated that its zero-shot performance often rivals or even
outperforms conventional supervised learning baselines in these tasks under few-shot settings. Additionally, the
much improved zero-shot image-to-text and text-to-image retrieval capabilities of our model will potentially
empower trainees, physicians, and researchers to more accurately and flexibly retrieve relevant patient cases or
educational examples based on image or natural language queries once it can be efficiently implemented into
healthcare systems or databases. Equipped with a multimodal decoder, our visual-language foundation model
also provides the flexibility to be further fine-tuned in downstream tasks that involve language generation (e.g.
image captioning) and/or multimodal reasoning based on both visual and textual inputs.
A key limitation of our study is the scale of data pretraining, which still pales when compared to billion-
scale datasets used in developing large scale visual-language foundation models in the general machine learn-
ing community, and therefore we are likely to see further potential improvement in zero-shot recognition ca-
pabilities, representation quality, and robustness by increasing both the quantity and quality of histopathology
image-caption datasets. Additionally, while the current landscape of visual-language foundation models for
histopathology focuses primarily on image-level tasks, the ability of these models to recognize fine-grained
visual concepts at the region-level (i.e. cellular or even sub-cellular level) has not yet been studied, meaning
that other important tasks such as mitosis detection, fine-grained tissue segmentation, or cell counting currently
remain outside the scope of their downstream capabilities.
Online Methods
Pretraining dataset curation
We use publicly available articles from PubMed and educational resources to curate the largest-to-date dataset
of histopathology image-caption pairs. We use deep learning to automate data cleaning iteratively. For curation,
we divide the data sources into two categories: EDU, which consists of data extracted from educational sources,
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
and PMC OA, which consists of data downloaded from the PubMed Central Open Access Dataset1.
The data curation process poses two main challenges: filtering for histopathology data and handling
image panels. The first challenge is that the raw downloaded data comprise both histopathology and non-
histopathology examples. The second challenge is that a significant portion of EDU and most of PMC OA
are in the form of figure panels, where the image consists of multiple sub-images arranged in a panel with
parts of the caption addressing all or some of the sub-images. In light of these challenges, manually cleaning
the data is infeasible. We clean the data in three steps: 1) detecting histopathology images (as single images
or sub-images), 2) splitting captions that refer to image panels into separate captions into sub-captions, and
3) aligning sub-images with sub-captions within each image panel. To automate the cleaning process using
deep learning, we take advantage of the fact that EDU is significantly cleaner than PMC OA and orders of
magnitude smaller (45k vs. 18M) by manually cleaning EDU and using it as the starting training data for each
step described below.
To detect histopathology images, we use an object detection model (YOLOv5)88 to generate bounding
boxes for extracting detected images. To avoid the laborious task of manually labeling ground truth bounding
boxes in EDU, we generate synthetic data by randomly selecting single-panel images and arranging them in an
image panel. We iteratively refine the detection model by validating on a small subset (< 0.5%) of PMC OA
and adding incorrectly labeled samples to the training set.
For caption splitting, we collected a dataset of original and split captions (while cleaning EDU) to fine-
tune a GPT-style model pretrained on PubMed and other medical text89. We pose the problem of splitting
captions as causal language modeling, where we fine-tune the language model to take the original full caption
as input, and predict the sub-captions separated by the key word “Next caption: ”. We use the fine-tuned model
to perform caption splitting.
To align the detected histopathology images with split captions, we first train a CLIP model45 on the
cleaned EDU dataset along with PMC OA single figures that do not require splitting and alignment. Using
the trained model, given a set of m detected images and n split captions from an image panel, we compute
the image embeddings {u0, u1, . . . , um} and text embeddings {v0, v1, . . . , vn} in the aligned latent space. For
each image embedding ui, we compute the cosine-similarity score with each text embedding vj. We retrieve
the text that has the highest cosine-similarity score si,j := uiTvj and consider {ui, vj} to be an image-caption
pair for our cleaned dataset.
By applying the three steps above to PMC OA, we create PMC-Path, a pathology-specific image-caption
1ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/tools/openftlist/
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
dataset derived from PubMed figures. We then combine it with EDU to form our full unfiltered pretraining
dataset of 1,786,362 image-caption pairs. However, PMC-Path also contains a significant number of pairs
that refer to animal histopathology as well as non-H&E stains (such as IHC, Masson’s trichrome, Congo red,
etc.). Since our downstream evaluation only concerns human histopathology and H&E tasks, we would like
to assess how the animal and special staining data would affect performance. We first parse the captions to
exclude samples referencing non-human animals, forming a dataset of 1,170,647 human pairs. Additionally,
we trained a classifier that identifies H&E stains to further filter the human-only dataset and create a dataset of
457,372 pairs. We find that CONCH pretrained on the human-only dataset performed the best on downstream
tasks in general (See Extended Data Figure 8).
Visual-language pretraining
For visual-language pretraining, we use an equal-weighted combination of the image-text contrastive loss and
the captioning loss following CoCa47, a state-of-the-art visual-language foundation model pretrained on gen-
eral domain image-caption pairs. The model consists of an image encoder, f( · ; θ), a text encoder, g( · ; ϕ), and
a multimodal text decoder, h( · ; ψ). The image encoder includes the backbone and two attentional pooler mod-
ules, parameterized by θbackbone, θcontrast and θcaption respectively. The backbone is a vision transformer (ViT)90
following the standard ViT-base architecture with 12 Transformer layers, 12 attention heads, an embedding di-
mension of 768, and a hidden dimension of 3,072. The token size is 16 × 16, and learned absolute positional
embeddings are added to each token. The backbone transforms images in the form of raw RGB pixel values to
dense feature maps in a more semantically rich representation space learned from data. Each attentional pooler
is responsible for computing a fixed number (denoted by n) of image tokens from the last layer representation
of the ViT backbone using multi-headed attention and n learned queries. For enabling cross-modal retrieval
via contrastive learning, the first attentional pooler fcontrast( · ; θcontrast) uses a single query (ncontrast = 1) to
compute a single image token designed to capture the global representation of the image. The second atten-
tional pooler fcaption( · ; θcaption) uses ncaption = 256 queries to generate a set of 256 image tokens designed to
capture more local and fine-grained details of the image, which are typically required for captioning. The text
encoder and multimodal decoder are both GPT-style Transformer models that employ causal attention masks
for left-to-right autoregressive language modeling. Similar to the image encoder, the text encoder and multi-
modal decoder consist of 12 Transformer layers with an embedding dimension of 768 and a hidden dimension
of 3072. The text encoder includes an embedding table for mapping discrete word tokens to continuous em-
beddings and a set of learned absolute positional embeddings. Additionally, the text encoder appends a learned
<CLS> token to each tokenized caption, which has access to the full context during Transformer attention to
extract a global representation of a given caption. The multimodal decoder inserts a cross-attention layer after
each multiheaded self-attention layer for incorporating information from image tokens and includes a final
language modeling head for predicting the distribution of the next token over the supported vocabulary.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
During visual-language pretraining, a mini-batch consists of M image-caption pairs (xi, wi)M
i=1, where
wi = (<BOS>, wi,1, . . . , wi,T, <EOS>) is a sequence of T word tokens representing the ith caption. For a
given pair (xi, wi), we let (ui, vi) be the output of fcontrast(·; θcontrast) and the output of g(·; θ) at the position
corresponding to the <CLS> token, respectively, after ℓ2-normalization. The complete objective is given by:
L = −
1
2M
M
X
i=1
log
exp
 τuT
i vi

PM
j=1 exp (τuT
i vj)
−
1
2M
M
X
j=1
log
exp
 τvT
j uj

PM
i=1 exp
 τvT
j ui

−1
M
M
X
i=1
T+1
X
t=1
log p (wi,t | wi,0:t−1, xi; θ, ϕ, ψ)
(1)
The first and second terms represent image-to-text (i2t) and text-to-image (t2i) contrastive loss, respectively,
to maximize the cosine-similarity scores between paired image and text embeddings relative to remaining
negative pairings in the mini-batch. The last term seeks to maximize the log-likelihood of each observed token
under the multimodal autoregressive language model (jointly parameterized by the image encoder, text encoder,
and multimodal decoder), conditioned on previous tokens in the caption as well as the corresponding image.
Each visual-language pretraining experiment was trained for 40 epochs, distributed across 8 NVIDIA A100
80GB GPUs with a local batch size of 48 per GPU, and uses gradient accumulation to achieve an effective
global batch size of 1536. We set the image size to 448 × 448 px, where larger images are first resized
along the shorter edge and center-cropped and smaller images are zero-padded as needed. For all optimization
hyperparameters, refer to Extended Data Table 29.
Pretraining unimodal encoders
Prior work79 has shown that before joint visual-language pretraining using paired image-caption data, per-
forming self-supervised pretraining of unimodal modules using unpaired data can substantially improve down-
stream zero-shot transfer performance. We pre-train our image encoder using iBOT91, a state-of-the-art, self-
supervised pretraining algorithm for unlabeled image data. An in-house dataset of 16 million 256 × 256-sized
image tiles are sampled and extracted at 20×-equivalent magnification from the tissue regions of 21,442 WSIs
spanning over 350 cancer subtypes under the OncoTree classification system85. Detailed hyperparameters for
image-only pretraining are provided in Extended Data Table 30. For pretraining the language model, we
build a diverse corpus of pathology-relevant texts ranging from text from pathology educational texts and fi-
nal diagnosis section of over 550k surgical pathology reports from Massachusetts General Hospital and over
400k select histopathology-relevant PubMed abstracts. We used regex to de-identify in-house diagnostic re-
ports, notably replacing patient and physician names, specimen ids, medical record numbers, and dates with a
corresponding special token in the vocabulary. We pretrain a 24-layer GPT-style autoregressive Transformer
using the next-word prediction loss. Namely, given a sequence of word tokens w = (<BOS>, wi,1, . . . , wi,T,
<EOS>), we maximize the log-likelihood of each token under an autoregressive generative model parameter-
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
ized by ξ:
Lclm(ξ) = −
T+1
X
t=1
log p (wt | w0:t−1; ξ)
(2)
Detailed hyperparameters for text-only pretraining are provided in Extended Data Table 31. After pretraining,
the first 12 layers of the transformer-based language models and the embedding table are used to initialize the
unimodal text encoder while the last 12 layers and the language modeling classifier head are used to initialize
the corresponding parameters in the multimodal decoder.
Zero-shot transfer on ROIs/tiles
For zero-shot transfer, we employ the method described in CLIP45. Each class is associated with a text prompt
consisting of a class name (e.g. “adenocarcinoma”) and a template (e.g. “this is {}.”, see Extended
Data Table 34 for templates used across all tasks). For a prompt associated with class j ∈{1, 2, . . . , C}, we
compute the ℓ2-normalized embedding vj using a text encoder trained on our paired dataset to form the linear
classifier weights. Since model performance can vary considerably depending on the choice of prompts, we
measure the performance spread by sampling subsets from a pathologist-curated set of prompts and reporting
the median. Alternatively, we can also ensemble all the prompts within a class by using the mean embedding
over the prompts as the text embedding associated with that class. See Extended Data Figure 2 for a compar-
ison with and without ensembling. Analogously, for each image, we compute the ℓ2-normalized embedding
ui. We then compute cosine-similarity scores between the image and each text embedding and the predicted
class is consequently the class with the highest similarity score, i.e.,
ˆyi = argmax
j
ui
Tvj
(3)
Since some evaluation sets are imbalanced, we report the balanced accuracy (i.e., the macro average over the
accuracy obtained on each class) and the average F1 score weighted by the support of each class. For SICAP,
we also report the quadratic Cohen’s κ score, which is often used for prostate Gleason grading92, where errors
between adjacent grading classes are penalized less.
Similarly for cross-modal retrieval, we use the same method as zero-shot classification above to re-
trieve the top-K images that are closest in the aligned latent space to a specific text query (text-to-image
retrieval). Image-to-text retrieval is performed analogously. To evaluate retrieval, we follow ALIGN46 and use
Recall@K, i.e., for what percentage of the test set is the correct result in the top K retrieved samples. We
choose K ∈{1, 5, 10} and also report mean recall by averaging the scores over the three Recall@K’s.
Unless otherwise specified, we enforce the maximum image size to be 448 × 448 for CONCH via image
resizing and center-cropping, similar to its pretraining configuration. For all models that are not our own, we
use their provided processor function and default configuration for image and text processing in downstream
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
evaluation.
Extending zero-shot transfer to WSIs
To extend zero-shot transfer to gigapixel images, we follow the method introduced by MI-Zero79. Namely, for
classification over C classes, the WSI is first divided into N tiles and computes the ℓ2-normalized embeddings
independently using the image encoder. For each tile embedding, we compute similarity scores with each text
embedding following the method for tiles described above, obtaining a set C similarity scores for each tile.
To aggregate similarity scores across tiles, we use the top-K pooling operator by averaging over the highest
K similarity scores for each class to obtain the slide-level similarity score. Consequently, the class with the
highest slide-level score is the predicted class. We choose K ∈{1, 5, 10, 50, 100} and report metrics for the
K with the highest balanced accuracy for classification tasks and Cohen’s κ for DHMC LUAD. Similar to
classification on tiles, we report slide-level balanced accuracy and weighted F1 score for classification tasks.
For DHMC LUAD, since the task of LUAD subtyping can be subjective, we report Cohen’s κ score.
We perform zero-shot slide-level segmentation using a similar approach as classification. We divide the
WSI into tiles and compute similarity scores for each tile independently. However, instead of aggregating the
scores across tiles into a single slide-level prediction, we map the tile-level scores to their corresponding spatial
locations in the WSI, averaging the scores in overlapped regions. Finally for each pixel, we assign the class
with the highest score as the prediction, producing a pixel-level segmentation mask. We compute the Dice
score93 to quantify the quality of the predicted segmentation mask relative to the ground truth.
Details of WSI preprocessing for both classification and segmentation tasks are described in the WSI
processing section.
Supervised classification experiments
We perform supervised classification experiments on all tasks with a labeled set of training examples available,
including TCGA BRCA for BRCA subtyping, TCGA NSCLC for NSCLC subtyping, TCGA RCC for RCC
subtyping, CRC100k for CRC tissue classification and SICAP for Gleason grading. For each dataset, we use
the official train/test split if it is available or we use the remaining labeled cases for training after holding out
the cases used for zero-shot classification evaluation (see Downstream evaluation datasets for a more detailed
breakdown). For slide-level experiments, we consider 4 visual-language pretrained image encoders, including
that of CONCH, PLIP, BiomedCLIP as well as OpenAICLIP. All 4 encoders follow the ViT-Base architecture
with a patch size of 16 except PLIP, which uses a patch size of 32. For slide-level tasks, we additionally
consider a ResNet50 encoder truncated after the 3rd residual block and with weights initialized from supervised
classification on ImageNet, as it has been a common choice in weakly-supervised classification of WSIs. For
ROI-level tasks, we add CTransPath84 as a baseline, which is a SOTA general purpose vision encoder trained
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
with self-supervised learning on a large dataset of unlabeled histopathology images. The reason we do not
use CTransPath for the slide-level tasks is that TCGA slides (including those used in our test sets), make up a
large portion of the data used to train CTransPath and therefore may result in information leakage that unfairly
inflate the performance of CTransPath on TCGA-based benchmarks.
For all experiments, we standardize the image input size to 224 × 224. We use each image encoder to
extract a low-dimensional feature embedding from each image (tiles in the case of WSIs). For CONCH, we use
the output of the attentional pooler that corresponds to image / text alignment, with an embedding dimension of
512. For CLIP-based models including PLIP, BiomedCLIP and OpenAICLIP, we use the <CLS> token, which
is also used for image / text alignment during pretraining, and similarly has a dimension of 512. For ResNet50,
we use global average pooling after the 3rd residual block to obtain an 1024-dimensional embedding. For
CTransPath, we also use the <CLS> token representation, which has an embedding dimension of 768.
For WSI classification, we use the same preprocessing setup as zero-shot classification with MI-Zero.
We use the widely used attention-based multiple instance learning (ABMIL)81 for weakly-supervised on WSIs
using slide-level labels. The ABMIL model architecture consists of a fully-connected layer and ReLU non-
linearity that first maps the inputs to an embedding dimension of 512, followed by a two-layer, gated variant
(as described in the original paper) of the attention network, with a hidden dimension of 384. Lastly a fully-
connected classifier head maps the attention-pooled slide-level representation to logits, which are interpreted
as class probabilities after softmax normalization. We use dropout with P = 0.25 after each intermediate layer
in the network for regularization. We train each model for 20 epochs on the training set, using an AdamW
optimizer, a cosine learning rate scheduler and a learning rate of 1e-4. We use a weighted data sampler that
increases the sampling probability of slides from minority classes such that on average the model sees the same
number of slides from each class each epoch. The full set of hyperparameters is summarized in Extended Data
Table 32.
For ROI-level classification, we conduct linear probing by training a logistic regression model on top
of the pretrained image embeddings of each encoder. We follow a practice recommended by the large-scale
self-supervised representation learning community94 and set the ℓ2 regularization coefficient λ to
100
MC where
M is the embedding dimension and C is the number of classes. We use the lgbfs solver and set the maximum
number of iterations to 800.
For few-shot classification, we keep the test set the same, and vary the number of labeled examples per
class for training (known as “shot”) from nc = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, . . . up to either nc = 512 or the maximum
number of labeled examples available for a given class. Otherwise, the hyperparamters and training setup
remain the same as described above.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Captioning with fine-tuning
For captioning, we fine-tune the entire model on a small training set of image-caption pairs. When fine-tuning
our setup, we set the weight for contrastive loss to zero. To evaluate performance, we report the commonly
used metrics METEOR95 and ROUGE96. For each model, we train for a maximum of 40 epochs and select the
checkpoint with the highest METEOR on the validation set using an early-stopping patience of 10 epochs. At
inference time, we generate captions using top-K sampling97 as the decoding strategy with K = 50, where at
each time step, the K most likely tokens are filtered and the probability mass is redistributed before sampling.
Similar to zero-shot classification and retrieval, we set the maximum image size to 448 × 448. The full set of
hyperparameters used to fine-tune captioning is presented in Extended Data Table 33.
Evaluation metrics
For classification tasks, we report balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and AUC ROC. Balanced accuracy
is defined as the macro average of the recall of each class. Weighted F1 score is computed by taking the
average of the F1 score (the harmonic mean of precision and recall) of each class, weighted by the support of
each class. In the binary case, AUC ROC is the area under the receiver operating curve, which plots the true
positive rate against the false positive rate as the classification threshold is varied. AUC ROC is generalized
to the multiclass case by averaging over the AUC ROC of all pairwise combinations of classes. For retrieval,
we use the metric Recall@K, which is the proportion of the data that is correctly retrieved among the top
K retrieved samples. Following ALIGN46, we choose K ∈{1, 5, 10} and also compute the mean recall,
which averages over the Recall@K’s. For segmentation, we report the Dice score, which is the same as the
F1 score, and the precision and recall of the positive class. For captioning, we report METEOR and ROUGE
for comparing the predicted caption with the ground truth caption. METEOR95 (Metric for Evaluation of
Translation with Explicit ORdering) is a metric based on unigram matching that considers both precision
and recall between the original and ground truth and takes into account synonyms and word forms. ROUGE96
(Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation) is computes the overlap of n-grams between the predicted
caption and ground truth. We use ROUGE-1, which considers unigrams.
Downstream evaluation datasets
Source A is a dataset of image-caption pairs extracted from a held-out source from data scraping. We split
multipanel figures and matched them with captions manually. Since we use this dataset for captioning as well,
and the captions are generally noisy and often contain information not present in the images, a board-certified
pathologist has cleaned the text and we use the cleaned version for all downstream tasks. After filtering and
cleaning, we yield 797 images with an average width of 570 px and an average height of 428 px. We use this
dataset in its entirety for cross-modal retrieval. We also use this dataset for captioning after performing a 70-
10-20 split for training, validation, and testing. To avoid information leakage, the dataset split was performed
at the figure level (taking into account multifigure panels that have been separated).
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
Source B is a dataset of image-caption pairs extracted from a held-out source from data scraping. Similar to
Source A, we split multipanel figures and matched them with captions manually. After filtering and cleaning,
we yield 1,755 images with an average width of 512 px and an average height of 410 px. Since the dataset
is much bigger than Source A, we do not perform manual cleaning of the captions. We use this dataset for
cross-modal retrieval.
TCGA LUAD consists of 165 image-caption pairs extracted from 49 LUAD H&E histopathology slides from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)2. For each slide, a board-certified pathologist chooses up to 5 tiles of in-
terest from each slide and provides captions describing the tissue pattern as well as any notable morphological
features. This yields a set of 165 image tiles with an average width of 656 px and average height of 642 px.
We use this set of image tiles for cross-modal retrieval.
TCGA BRCA consists of invasive breast carcinoma (BRCA) H&E FFPE diagnostic histopathology WSIs
from TCGA. The dataset consist of cases for primary invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) and invasive lobular
carcinoma (ILC). After removing slides with missing metadata, we collected a total of 1,048 slides (837 IDC
and 211 ILC). The zero-shot test set is a sampled subset of the full TCGA-RCC dataset consisting 150 WSIs
(75 for each of class). For the supervised learning experiments, we hold out the zero-shot test set as the test set
and use the rest of the slides as the supervised training set after excluding slides from patients who appear
in the test set. This yields a training set of 881 slides (754 IDC, 127 ILC). See Extended Data Table 35 for
prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
TCGA NSCLC consists of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) H&E FFPE diagnostic histopathology WSIs
from the TCGA. The dataset consists of cases for primary lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and lung squamous
cell carcinoma (LUSC) cases. After removing slides with missing or incorrect metadata, we collected a total
of 1,041 slides (529 LUAD and 512 LUSC). The zero-shot test set is a sampled subset of the full TCGA-RCC
dataset consisting 150 WSIs (75 for each of class). For the supervised learning experiments, we hold out the
zero-shot test set as the test set and use the rest of the slides as the supervised training set after excluding
slides from patients who appear in the test set. This yields a training set of 846 slides (432 LUAD, 414 LUSC).
See Extended Data Table 35 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
TCGA RCC consists of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) H&E FFPE diagnostic histopathology WSIs from the
TCGA. The dataset consists of cases for primary clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC), papillary renal
cell carcinoma (PRCC) and chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (CHRCC). After removing slides missing low-
resolution downsamples, we collected a total of 922 WSIs (519 CCRCC, 294 PRCC and 109 CHRCC). The
zero-shot test set is a sampled subset of the full TCGA-RCC dataset consisting 225 WSIs (75 for each of 3
classes). For the supervised learning experiments, we hold out the zero-shot test set as the test set and use the
rest of the slides as the supervised training set after excluding slides from patients who appear in the test set.
This yielded a training set of 693 slides (444 CCRCC, 215 PRCC, 34 ChRCC). See Extended Data Table 35
for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
2portal.gdc.cancer.gov
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
DHMC LUAD98 is a dataset of 143 H&E LUAD slides, each labeled with the primary histologic growth pat-
tern (59 Acinar, 51 Solid, 19 Lepidic, 9 Micropapillary, 5 Papillary). We only use this dataset for zero-shot
classification. See Extended Data Table 36 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
CRC100k99 is a dataset of 224 × 224 px image tiles at 0.5 microns per pixel (mpp) extracted from 50 patients
with colorectal adenocarcinoma. Each image belongs to one of nine classes: adipose, background, debris,
lymphocytes, mucus, smooth muscle, normal colon mucosa, cancer-associated stroma, and colorectal adeno-
carcinoma epithelium. For the supervised dataset, we use the officially provided splits of 100,000 images in
the train set and 7,180 images in the test set. For the zero-shot test set, we only use the official test set. We
refer the reader to Extended Data Table 37 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
WSSS4LUAD100 is a dataset of lung adenocarcinoma image tiles of around 200 to 500 px in dimension each
labeled as tumor, tumor-associated stroma, and/or normal. For our evaluation, we filter for the samples that
have only one ground truth label. We are left with 4,693 images from the official training split. Refer to Ex-
tended Data Table 38 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification.
SICAP92 consists of 512 × 512 px images extracted from 155 WSIs of core-needle biopsies of prostate cancer,
digitized at 10× magnification. The official training and testing split partitions the dataset into 9,959 images
from 124 WSIs for training, and 2,122 images from 31 WSIs for testing. Each tile is labeled by the primary
Gleason pattern (3, 4, or 5) or as non-cancerous (NC). For zero-shot classification, we use the official test set
for evaluation only while for supervised classification, we use the official splits for training and testing. For
zero-shot segmentation (tumor vs. benign), we use the slides from the official test split and corresponding
pixel-level segmentation mask for evaluation (combining Gleason patterns 3, 4, and 5 as the tumor class). Re-
fer to Extended Data Table 38 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot classification and segmentation.
DigestPath101 is a dataset of 660 colonoscopy H&E tissue section images from 324 patients, acquired at
20×-equivalent magnification. We use the subset of 250 images from 93 patients for which pixel-level lesion
annotation for colorectal cancer tissue is provided and perform zero-shot segmentation evaluation. Refer to
Extended Data Table 38 for prompts used for each class in zero-shot segmentation.
WSI processing
For slide-level tasks, the processing pipeline for WSIs consist of tissue segmentation, tiling, and feature ex-
traction. We use the CLAM library5 for tissue segmentation, which computes a binary mask for tissue using
binary thresholding along the saturation channel after converting a downsample of the slide form the RGB to
HSV color space. Median blurring and morphololgical closing were used to smooth tissue contours and re-
move artifacts. The contours are filtered by area to yield the segmentation mask. For zero-shot and supervised
classification, we follow previous conventions5,84 and divide the segmented tissue regions into contiguous 256
× 256 px tiles at 10×-equivalent magnification. For segmentation, we extract tiles using a smaller tile size
(224 × 224 px) with 75% overlap at the highest magnification possible (i.e., 10× for SICAP and 20× for
DigestPath) in order to achieve more fine-grained predictions. After tiling, for feature extraction, we resize all
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
tiles to 224 × 224 px and compute embeddings for each tile independently using a frozen pretrained image
encoder and cache them for downstream evaluation.
Pretraining dataset characterization
We estimate the distribution of topics covered by our pretraining captions. We first create a list of 19 topics
that cover major anatomic sites relevant to the study of pathology. For each topic, a board-certified pathologist
then curates a list of keywords associated with the topic. We then map a caption to a topic if it contains a
specific word. Since it is impractical to curate an exhaustive set of keywords to cover all captions, we use
k-nearest neighbors (kNN) with k = 5 to categorize the remaining captions. The distribution of captions on
the topics are shown in Figure 1b. Within each topic (as well as the overall dataset), we qualitatively visualize
the contents of the captions using wordclouds (Extended Data Figure 1).
Statistical analysis
Nonparametric bootstrapping with 1,000 samples is used to construct 95% confidence intervals for model
performance. Observed differences in model performance were tested for statistical significance via two-sided
paired permutation test with 1,000 permutations. In each permutation, independent predictions or prediction
outcomes of two models are randomly swapped to obtain a new difference in model performance. The p-value
is the proportion of differences in model performance that are greater than the observed difference in terms of
absolute value. For comparing zero-shot classification performance in the setting of randomly sampled prompts
(i.e., no prompt ensembling), the null hypothesis is that there is no difference in the median performance of
two models over the same set of sampled prompts. For all other tests, the null hypothesis is that there is no
difference in the model performance for the given test set.
Computing hardware and software
We used Python (version 3.8.13) for all experiments and analyses in the study, which can be replicated us-
ing open-source libraries as outlined below. For task-agnostic pretraining, we used 8×80GB NVIDIA A100
GPUs configured for multi-GPU training using distributed data-parallel (DDP) as implemented by the popular
open source deep learning framework PyTorch (version 2.0.0, CUDA 11.7) (pytorch.org). All downstream
experiments were conducted on single 24GB NVIDIA 3090 GPUs. For unimodal pretraining of our visual
encoder using iBOT, we modify the vision transformer implementation maintained by the open-source Timm
library (version 0.9.2) from Hugging Face (huggingface.co) for the encoder backbone and use the original
iBOT implementation (github.com/bytedance/ibot) for training. For NLP workflows, we used open-source li-
braries provided by Hugging Face. Notably, we used Transformers (version 4.27.3) and Accelerate (version
0.15.0) for tokenization of text data and unimodal pretraining of our language model, and Evaluate (version
0.4.0) for its implementation of common machine translation/image captioning metrics including ROUGE and
METEOR. We integrate our pretrained unimodal visual encoder and language model into the open clip library
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
(version 2.14.0) for visual-language pretraining using the CoCa framework. All WSI processing was supported
by OpenSlide (version 4.3.1) and openslide-python (version 1.2.0). We use Scikit-learn (version 1.2.1) for its
implementation of common machine learning model evaluation metrics for image classification and to train
logistic regression models for linear probe experiments. Implementations of other visual-language models
benchmarked in the study are found on Hugging Face model hub (huggingface.co/models): PLIP (vinid/plip),
BiomedCLIP (microsoft/BiomedCLIP-PubMedBERT 256-vit base patch16 224, OpenAICLIP (openai/clip-
vit-base-patch16), GIT-base (microsoft/git-base), GIT-large (microsoft/git-large). Pillow (version 9.3.0) and
Opencv-python were used to perform basic image processing tasks . Matplotlib (version 3.7.1) and Seaborn
(version 0.12.2) were used to create plots and figures. Usage of other miscellaneous Python libraries is listed
in the Reporting Summary.
Data availability
TCGA whole slide data and labels are available from the NIH genomic data commons (portal.gdc.cancer.gov).
DHMC LUAD whole slide data and labels can be accessed through the Dartmouth Biomedical Informatics
Research and Data Science website (bmirds.github.io/LungCancer/). SICAP whole slide and tile data with
corresponding labels can be accessed through the data portal at data.mendeley.com/datasets/9xxm58dvs3/1.
CRC100k tile data and labels can be found at zenodo.org/record/1214456. WSSS4LUAD image tiles and
labels can be found at wsss4luad.grand-challenge.org/. Pretraining data was curated from image-caption pairs
in educational resources and PubMed. Educational resources are subject to copyright terms of publishers and
will not be made available. The unprocessed PubMed Central Open Access dataset are available from the
NIH PubMed Central website (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/tools/openftlist/). Pathology reports used in unimodal
text pretraining are in-house data used with institutional permission through IRB approval for the current study
and are thus not publicly available. All requests for data collected or curated in-house will be evaluated based
on institutional and departmental policies to determine whether the data requested is subject to intellectual
property or patient privacy obligations.
Code availability
Code for performing various downstream tasks using a pretrained visual-language foundation model will be
released upon publication. Model weights depend on the use of proprietary patient data and may be requested
upon institutional permission and case by case approval. We have documented all technical deep learning
methods and software libraries used in the study while ensuring the paper is accessible to the broader clinical
and scientific audience.
Author contributions
F.M., M.Y.L., B.C., and D.F.K.W. conceived the study and designed the experiments. M.Y.L., B.C., R.J.C.,
T.D., I.L., D.F.K.W, I.O. and L.P.L. performed data collection and cleaning for data used for unimodal and
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
visual-language pretraining. M.Y.L, B.C. and R.J.C performed model development. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W.
and G.J. performed experimental analysis. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W, A.Z., R.J.C., I.L., T.D., G.J., F.M., G.G,
L.P.L and A.V.P. interpreted experimental results and provided feedback on the study. M.Y.L., B.C., D.F.K.W.
and F.M. prepared the manuscript with input from all co-authors. F.M. supervised the research.
Acknowledgements
We thank Andrew Song for his feedback. This work was supported in part by the BWH president’s fund, BWH
& MGH Pathology, and NIGMS R35GM138216 (F.M.). M.Y.L. was also supported by the Siebel Scholars
program. R.J.C. was also supported by the NSF Graduate Fellowship.
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
Extended Figure 1: Caption content of pre-training dataset. Wordclouds of captions to qualitatively visu-
alize the caption content of each category in the pre-training dataset. Larger words are more represented in the
captions. Common articles, nouns, and verbs are ignored.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
Extended Figure 2: Zero-shot classification: single prompt vs. ensembling. a-d, slide-level tasks. e,
ROI-level tasks. We compare using a single text prompt per class vs. ensembling over multiple class names
and templates. Since zero-shot performance of a visual-language pretrained model can be sensitive to the
prompts used45, when using a single prompt per class, for each class, we independently randomly sample a
prompt from the pool of candidate templates and class names (see Extended Data Tables 34-38 for the prompt
pools). We randomly sample 50 sets of prompts for each task, and plot the resulting distribution of zero-shot
performance for each model using boxplot. Each dot corresponds to a single set of prompts (n = 50 for each
box). Boxes indicate quartile values and whiskers extend to data points within 1.5× the interquartile range.
Triangles indicate the performance of prompt ensembling. For slide-level tasks we show performance for all
Ks used in top-K pooling. We observe prompt ensembling can substantially boost performance (relative to
the median performance of randomly sampled single prompts) for most models in most tasks, except when
the median performance is near random chance, such as for OpenAICLIP on most tasks and PLIP on TCGA
BRCA. The poor median performance in these scenarios indicate that the model fails to perform under the
majority of prompts sampled and therefore it is unsurprising that the ensembled prompt perform equally bad
or worse. See Extended Data Tables 1-14 for more results.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
Extended Figure 3: CONCH heatmaps, renal cell carcinomas. Pathologist-annotated H&E images, corre-
sponding cosine-similarity heatmaps of, from top to bottom, papillary, chromophobe, and clear cell renal cell
carcinomas. Tiles of high similarity (red border) and low similarity (black border) with the predicted class
label are randomly sampled and displayed next to each heatmap. We find excellent agreement between the
annotated image and the regions of the slide with high similarity, with the tiles demonstrating stereotypical
morphology of the tumors within the high-similarity regions and stroma or other normal constituents of the
kidney in the low similarity regions.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
Extended Figure 4: CONCH heatmaps, non-small cell lung carcinomas. Pathologist-annotated H&E im-
ages, corresponding cosine-similarity heatmaps of adenocarcinoma (top) and squamous cell carcinoma (bot-
tom) of the lung. Tiles of high similarity (red border) and low similarity (black border) with the predicted
class label are randomly sampled and displayed next to each heatmap. We find excellent agreement between
the annotated image and the regions of the slide with high similarity, with the tiles demonstrating stereotypical
morphology of the tumors within the high-similarity regions and stroma or other normal constituents of the
lung in the low similarity regions.
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
Extended Figure 5: CONCH heatmap, lobular carcinoma of the breast. Pathologist-annotated H&E im-
age, corresponding cosine-similarity heatmap of lobular carcinoma of the breast. Tiles of high similarity (red
border) and low similarity (black border) with the predicted class label are randomly sampled and displayed
next to the heatmap. As with the ductal carcinoma heatmap in Fig. 2e, we find excellent agreement between
the annotated image and the regions of the slide with high similarity, with the tiles demonstrating stereotypical
morphology of lobular caricnoma within the high-similarity regions and stroma or other normal constituents
of the breast in the low similarity regions.
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
Extended Figure 6: ROI-level few-shot classification experiments. We investigate the label efficiency of
different visual-language pretrained encoders in the few-shot setting where we vary the number of training
labels per class (nc), for nc = 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 . . . up to 512. For each nc, we sample 5 different sets of train-
ing examples and perform linear probing on each training set using associated image labels (see Supervised
classification experiments for details). We show their individual model performance via boxplot (i.e., n = 5
for each box) to study the variance in model performance when performing supervised learning with very few
training examples. Boxes indicate quartile values and whiskers extend to data points within 1.5× the interquar-
tile range. For reference, the zero-shot performance of each model is shown as a dotted line on the same plot.
In terms of few-shot supervised learning, CONCH achieves better performance (i.e. in terms of the median
accuracy of 5 runs) than other encoders for different sizes of training set and for all tasks. Additionally,in
SICAP, we find CONCH zero-shot performance to be competitive with PLIP and BiomedCLIP few-shot up to
64 labels per class.
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Extended Figure 7: Additional Retrieval Examples. a. Example images among top-10 retrieved results
for each prompt from Source A. Similarity scores between each image and prompt are shown in the top-
right corner of each image. Magnification information is unknown. b. Examples among top-10 results for
each prompt from Source B. Magnification information is unknown. c. Retrieved examples (among top-10)
using complex prompts with detailed morphological information. Images are from an in-house dataset of tiles
sampled from 1,620 cases held-out during pretraining, spanning 108 OncoTree codes (5 for each code).
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
Extended Figure 8: CONCH Pretraining Data Ablations. Comparison between CONCH pretrained on
human-only data (n = 1, 170, 647) using CoCa vs. human-only data using CLIP vs. H&E only data (n =
457, 372) vs. the full unfiltered dataset (n = 1, 786, 362). a. Zero-shot performance on downstream subtyping
(TCGA BRCA, n = 150; TCGA RCC, n = 225; TCGA NSCLC, n = 150; DHMC LUAD, n = 143;
CRC100k, n = 7, 180; WSSS4LUAD, n = 4, 693) and grading (SICAP, n = 2, 122) tasks. Following pre-
established conventions, Cohen’s κ is reported for SICAP and quadratically weighted Cohen’s κ is reported for
DHMC LUAD, while balanced accuracy is reported for all other tasks. CONCH performs the best on average.
b. Model performance in cross-modal retrieval on 3 datasets of image-text pairs (Source A, n = 797; Source
B, n = 1, 755; TCGA LUAD, n = 165). CONCH (CLIP) performs the best on average.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.840 (0.783, 0.895)
0.839 (0.775, 0.893)
0.932 (0.886, 0.970)
PLIP
0.507 (0.500, 0.523)
0.348 (0.263, 0.438)
0.688 (0.600, 0.771)
BiomedCLIP
0.553 (0.510, 0.600)
0.465 (0.358, 0.557)
0.852 (0.784, 0.912)
OpenAICLIP
0.500 (0.500, 0.500)
0.333 (0.255, 0.418)
0.643 (0.544, 0.726)
Table 1: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on BRCA subtyping (n = 150) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95%
CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.893 (0.850, 0.932)
0.895 (0.852, 0.934)
0.973 (0.952, 0.991)
PLIP
0.804 (0.755, 0.850)
0.797 (0.740, 0.850)
0.956 (0.932, 0.975)
BiomedCLIP
0.791 (0.737, 0.840)
0.789 (0.733, 0.842)
0.924 (0.893, 0.950)
OpenAICLIP
0.347 (0.333, 0.363)
0.194 (0.141, 0.252)
0.673 (0.626, 0.719)
Table 2: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on RCC subtyping (n = 225) in terms of bal-
anced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI
is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.900 (0.849, 0.946)
0.900 (0.852, 0.947)
0.964 (0.936, 0.985)
PLIP
0.787 (0.720, 0.849)
0.786 (0.720, 0.847)
0.838 (0.768, 0.899)
BiomedCLIP
0.780 (0.713, 0.843)
0.776 (0.704, 0.840)
0.877 (0.819, 0.922)
OpenAICLIP
0.553 (0.503, 0.604)
0.478 (0.382, 0.570)
0.603 (0.514, 0.689)
Table 3: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on NSCLC subtyping (n = 150) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95%
CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Cohen’s κ
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
CONCH
0.236 (0.161, 0.314)
0.453 (0.332, 0.556)
0.324 (0.242, 0.413)
PLIP
0.079 (0.014, 0.142)
0.326 (0.250, 0.404)
0.198 (0.129, 0.267)
BiomedCLIP
0.009 (0.000, 0.041)
0.259 (0.204, 0.327)
0.032 (0.005, 0.071)
OpenAICLIP
0.004 (0.000, 0.021)
0.204 (0.200, 0.214)
0.045 (0.015, 0.087)
Table 4: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on DHMC LUAD (n = 143) in terms of Cohen’s
κ, balanced accuracy, and weighted F1 score. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
Model name
Quadratic weighted κ
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
CONCH
0.711 (0.688, 0.734)
0.624 (0.609, 0.640)
0.424 (0.401, 0.449)
PLIP
0.187 (0.153, 0.220)
0.312 (0.297, 0.326)
0.099 (0.087, 0.113)
BiomedCLIP
0.553 (0.520, 0.585)
0.487 (0.468, 0.505)
0.437 (0.413, 0.459)
OpenAICLIP
0.107 (0.081, 0.134)
0.294 (0.280, 0.309)
0.193 (0.177, 0.211)
Table 5: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on SICAP (n = 2, 122) in terms of quadratic
weighted Cohen’s κ, balanced accuracy, and weighted F1 score. Best performing model for each metric is
bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.791 (0.782, 0.800)
0.803 (0.794, 0.813)
0.979 (0.977, 0.981)
PLIP
0.674 (0.665, 0.683)
0.687 (0.676, 0.698)
0.944 (0.941, 0.947)
BiomedCLIP
0.553 (0.542, 0.564)
0.533 (0.521, 0.545)
0.924 (0.921, 0.928)
OpenAICLIP
0.271 (0.262, 0.280)
0.247 (0.236, 0.258)
0.781 (0.777, 0.786)
Table 6: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on CRC100k (n = 7, 180) in terms of balanced
accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.719 (0.706, 0.731)
0.705 (0.692, 0.718)
0.877 (0.870, 0.885)
PLIP
0.624 (0.609, 0.638)
0.636 (0.622, 0.650)
0.790 (0.780, 0.801)
BiomedCLIP
0.616 (0.603, 0.628)
0.575 (0.559, 0.589)
0.824 (0.815, 0.833)
OpenAICLIP
0.296 (0.290, 0.303)
0.196 (0.183, 0.209)
0.496 (0.484, 0.508)
Table 7: Zero-shot classification with prompt ensembling on WSSS4LUAD (n = 4, 693) in terms of bal-
anced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI
is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.643 (0.560, 0.673)
0.600 (0.454, 0.651)
0.873 (0.830, 0.895)
PLIP
0.530 (0.520, 0.543)
0.419 (0.381, 0.461)
0.701 (0.676, 0.720)
BiomedCLIP
0.550 (0.513, 0.600)
0.465 (0.383, 0.577)
0.726 (0.688, 0.758)
OpenAICLIP
0.500 (0.500, 0.500)
0.333 (0.333, 0.333)
0.564 (0.543, 0.579)
Table 8: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on BRCA subtyping (n = 150) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95%
CI is included in parentheses.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.796 (0.756, 0.824)
0.797 (0.748, 0.818)
0.961 (0.956, 0.965)
PLIP
0.749 (0.693, 0.764)
0.741 (0.679, 0.756)
0.944 (0.939, 0.947)
BiomedCLIP
0.656 (0.644, 0.682)
0.639 (0.624, 0.668)
0.900 (0.890, 0.910)
OpenAICLIP
0.333 (0.333, 0.338)
0.167 (0.167, 0.189)
0.575 (0.562, 0.589)
Table 9: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on RCC subtyping (n = 225) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled prompts).
Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.807 (0.720, 0.820)
0.803 (0.705, 0.820)
0.915 (0.889, 0.941)
PLIP
0.663 (0.567, 0.700)
0.640 (0.532, 0.700)
0.791 (0.763, 0.812)
BiomedCLIP
0.683 (0.620, 0.727)
0.670 (0.561, 0.721)
0.842 (0.805, 0.864)
OpenAICLIP
0.503 (0.500, 0.517)
0.371 (0.333, 0.396)
0.542 (0.513, 0.583)
Table 10: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on NSCLC subtyping (n = 150) in terms
of balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled prompts).
Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Cohen’s κ
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
CONCH
0.116 (0.094, 0.143)
0.324 (0.299, 0.342)
0.244 (0.212, 0.289)
PLIP
0.020 (0.014, 0.031)
0.231 (0.222, 0.246)
0.114 (0.069, 0.186)
BiomedCLIP
0.023 (0.014, 0.040)
0.253 (0.240, 0.273)
0.067 (0.044, 0.092)
OpenAICLIP
0.005 (0.000, 0.017)
0.194 (0.188, 0.205)
0.119 (0.053, 0.211)
Table 11: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on DHMC LUAD (n = 143) in terms of
Cohen’s κ, balanced accuracy, and weighted F1 score (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled prompts).
Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Quadratic weighted κ
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
CONCH
0.331 (0.254, 0.405)
0.349 (0.330, 0.390)
0.245 (0.203, 0.305)
PLIP
0.163 (0.118, 0.208)
0.293 (0.267, 0.323)
0.232 (0.180, 0.264)
BiomedCLIP
0.394 (0.355, 0.436)
0.376 (0.351, 0.386)
0.356 (0.319, 0.372)
OpenAICLIP
0.003 (0.000, 0.022)
0.251 (0.250, 0.259)
0.141 (0.108, 0.200)
Table 12: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on SICAP (n = 2, 122) in terms of quadratic
weighted Cohen’s κ, balanced accuracy, and weighted F1 score (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled
prompts). Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.566 (0.533, 0.598)
0.542 (0.496, 0.589)
0.901 (0.893, 0.918)
PLIP
0.520 (0.485, 0.540)
0.517 (0.484, 0.576)
0.879 (0.869, 0.898)
BiomedCLIP
0.422 (0.398, 0.436)
0.372 (0.346, 0.408)
0.859 (0.845, 0.868)
OpenAICLIP
0.234 (0.211, 0.250)
0.185 (0.149, 0.202)
0.727 (0.715, 0.733)
Table 13: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on CRC100k (n = 7, 180) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled prompts).
Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.598 (0.560, 0.650)
0.590 (0.547, 0.627)
0.795 (0.769, 0.827)
PLIP
0.462 (0.439, 0.492)
0.408 (0.386, 0.475)
0.710 (0.654, 0.760)
BiomedCLIP
0.512 (0.474, 0.550)
0.452 (0.408, 0.518)
0.747 (0.734, 0.775)
OpenAICLIP
0.333 (0.328, 0.333)
0.195 (0.189, 0.239)
0.551 (0.494, 0.608)
Table 14: Zero-shot classification without prompt ensembling on WSSS4LUAD (n = 4, 693) in terms of
balanced accuracy, weighted F1 score, and ROC AUC (median from 50 sets of randomly sampled prompts).
Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.847 (0.790, 0.897)
0.844 (0.782, 0.899)
0.937 (0.887, 0.973)
PLIP
0.780 (0.713, 0.844)
0.778 (0.708, 0.846)
0.864 (0.801, 0.916)
BiomedCLIP
0.807 (0.747, 0.860)
0.801 (0.729, 0.858)
0.911 (0.857, 0.954)
OpenAICLIP
0.807 (0.745, 0.869)
0.804 (0.736, 0.867)
0.899 (0.842, 0.948)
ResNet50 (tr)
0.767 (0.698, 0.834)
0.765 (0.693, 0.833)
0.814 (0.740, 0.882)
Table 15: Supervised classification on BRCA subtyping (n = 150) in terms of balanced accuracy, weighted
F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.942 (0.910, 0.970)
0.942 (0.910, 0.969)
0.995 (0.989, 0.999)
PLIP
0.911 (0.870, 0.947)
0.911 (0.867, 0.947)
0.989 (0.979, 0.996)
BiomedCLIP
0.916 (0.876, 0.948)
0.915 (0.875, 0.947)
0.990 (0.980, 0.997)
OpenAICLIP
0.898 (0.854, 0.935)
0.898 (0.854, 0.934)
0.979 (0.957, 0.993)
ResNet50 (tr)
0.893 (0.851, 0.931)
0.893 (0.852, 0.930)
0.972 (0.949, 0.989)
Table 16: Supervised classification on RCC subtyping (n = 225) in terms of balanced accuracy, weighted
F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.927 (0.886, 0.966)
0.927 (0.886, 0.967)
0.985 (0.968, 0.996)
PLIP
0.907 (0.853, 0.952)
0.907 (0.853, 0.947)
0.972 (0.944, 0.990)
BiomedCLIP
0.913 (0.866, 0.959)
0.913 (0.867, 0.960)
0.958 (0.923, 0.985)
OpenAICLIP
0.900 (0.847, 0.946)
0.900 (0.847, 0.947)
0.964 (0.935, 0.984)
ResNet50 (tr)
0.840 (0.782, 0.893)
0.839 (0.780, 0.893)
0.916 (0.869, 0.956)
Table 17: Supervised classification on NSCLC subtyping (n = 150) in terms of balanced accuracy, weighted
F1 score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Quadratic weighted kappa
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
CONCH
0.846 (0.828, 0.863)
0.751 (0.729, 0.772)
0.777 (0.759, 0.794)
PLIP
0.762 (0.739, 0.784)
0.589 (0.570, 0.609)
0.657 (0.637, 0.678)
BiomedCLIP
0.716 (0.694, 0.737)
0.546 (0.526, 0.565)
0.625 (0.602, 0.644)
OpenAICLIP
0.704 (0.676, 0.732)
0.599 (0.579, 0.617)
0.662 (0.641, 0.682)
CTransPath
0.835 (0.817, 0.851)
0.678 (0.658, 0.700)
0.747 (0.728, 0.766)
Table 18: Supervised classification on SICAP (n = 2, 122) in terms of quadratic weighted Cohen’s κ, bal-
anced accuracy, and weighted F1 score. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included
in parentheses.
Model name
Balanced accuracy
Weighted F1
ROC AUC
CONCH
0.930 (0.923, 0.937)
0.949 (0.944, 0.955)
0.994 (0.993, 0.995)
PLIP
0.879 (0.872, 0.888)
0.890 (0.884, 0.897)
0.989 (0.988, 0.991)
BiomedCLIP
0.896 (0.888, 0.903)
0.921 (0.915, 0.926)
0.991 (0.989, 0.992)
OpenAICLIP
0.884 (0.877, 0.891)
0.897 (0.890, 0.904)
0.992 (0.990, 0.993)
CTransPath
0.938 (0.932, 0.944)
0.950 (0.945, 0.955)
0.994 (0.993, 0.995)
Table 19: Supervised classification on CRC100k (n = 7, 180) in terms of balanced accuracy, weighted F1
score, and ROC AUC. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.400 (0.362, 0.435)
0.776 (0.748, 0.803)
0.888 (0.865, 0.910)
0.688 (0.665, 0.710)
PLIP
0.056 (0.042, 0.072)
0.198 (0.170, 0.226)
0.307 (0.276, 0.341)
0.187 (0.165, 0.210)
BiomedCLIP
0.161 (0.137, 0.189)
0.405 (0.368, 0.441)
0.553 (0.517, 0.591)
0.373 (0.346, 0.402)
OpenAICLIP
0.018 (0.009, 0.027)
0.046 (0.032, 0.061)
0.084 (0.065, 0.103)
0.049 (0.038, 0.062)
Table 20: Zero-shot text-to-image retrieval performance for Source A (n = 797) in terms of Recall@K for
K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included
in parentheses.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.402 (0.369, 0.433)
0.792 (0.764, 0.818)
0.883 (0.859, 0.905)
0.692 (0.670, 0.714)
PLIP
0.065 (0.049, 0.082)
0.222 (0.192, 0.251)
0.320 (0.287, 0.351)
0.202 (0.179, 0.225)
BiomedCLIP
0.171 (0.146, 0.197)
0.439 (0.403, 0.472)
0.582 (0.547, 0.615)
0.397 (0.373, 0.423)
OpenAICLIP
0.010 (0.004, 0.018)
0.049 (0.035, 0.064)
0.073 (0.055, 0.092)
0.044 (0.033, 0.056)
Table 21: Zero-shot image-to-text retrieval performance for Source A (n = 797) in terms of Recall@K for
K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included
in parentheses.
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.171 (0.151, 0.188)
0.437 (0.412, 0.462)
0.562 (0.539, 0.587)
0.390 (0.372, 0.409)
PLIP
0.020 (0.013, 0.027)
0.075 (0.063, 0.089)
0.132 (0.116, 0.148)
0.076 (0.066, 0.086)
BiomedCLIP
0.100 (0.086, 0.115)
0.264 (0.242, 0.284)
0.353 (0.328, 0.375)
0.239 (0.221, 0.256)
OpenAICLIP
0.009 (0.005, 0.014)
0.036 (0.027, 0.044)
0.052 (0.042, 0.063)
0.032 (0.026, 0.040)
Table 22: Zero-shot text-to-image retrieval performance for Source B (n = 1, 755) in terms of Recall@K
for K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.164 (0.146, 0.181)
0.403 (0.379, 0.426)
0.530 (0.508, 0.553)
0.366 (0.347, 0.384)
PLIP
0.024 (0.017, 0.031)
0.077 (0.065, 0.090)
0.124 (0.110, 0.140)
0.075 (0.065, 0.085)
BiomedCLIP
0.099 (0.085, 0.113)
0.251 (0.233, 0.272)
0.359 (0.336, 0.380)
0.236 (0.220, 0.252)
OpenAICLIP
0.005 (0.002, 0.008)
0.027 (0.019, 0.035)
0.043 (0.034, 0.053)
0.025 (0.019, 0.031)
Table 23: Zero-shot image-to-text retrieval performance for Source B (n = 1, 755) in terms of Recall@K
for K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.087 (0.047, 0.133)
0.247 (0.180, 0.313)
0.387 (0.313, 0.460)
0.240 (0.189, 0.293)
PLIP
0.027 (0.007, 0.053)
0.080 (0.040, 0.127)
0.180 (0.120, 0.247)
0.096 (0.060, 0.136)
BiomedCLIP
0.053 (0.020, 0.093)
0.193 (0.133, 0.267)
0.313 (0.240, 0.387)
0.187 (0.140, 0.240)
OpenAICLIP
0.020 (0.000, 0.047)
0.060 (0.027, 0.100)
0.107 (0.060, 0.160)
0.062 (0.033, 0.098)
Table 24: Zero-shot text-to-image retrieval performance for TCGA LUAD (n = 165) in terms of
Recall@K for K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded.
95% CI is included in parentheses.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
Model name
Recall@1
Recall@5
Recall@10
Mean Recall
CONCH
0.067 (0.030, 0.103)
0.188 (0.133, 0.248)
0.291 (0.224, 0.364)
0.182 (0.135, 0.230)
PLIP
0.018 (0.000, 0.042)
0.079 (0.042, 0.121)
0.115 (0.067, 0.164)
0.071 (0.040, 0.101)
BiomedCLIP
0.048 (0.018, 0.085)
0.158 (0.103, 0.212)
0.291 (0.224, 0.364)
0.166 (0.125, 0.210)
OpenAICLIP
0.006 (0.000, 0.018)
0.042 (0.012, 0.079)
0.097 (0.055, 0.139)
0.048 (0.026, 0.075)
Table 25: Zero-shot image-to-text retrieval performance for TCGA LUAD (n = 165) in terms of
Recall@K for K ∈{1, 5, 10} and mean recall over K. Best performing model for each metric is bolded.
95% CI is included in parentheses.
Model name
Dice score
Precision
Recall
CONCH
0.601 (0.530, 0.675)
0.672 (0.630, 0.722)
0.751 (0.696, 0.803)
PLIP
0.549 (0.496, 0.605)
0.605 (0.556, 0.656)
0.644 (0.595, 0.694)
BiomedCLIP
0.484 (0.452, 0.520)
0.536 (0.505, 0.569)
0.557 (0.519, 0.598)
OpenAICLIP
0.367 (0.314, 0.426)
0.599 (0.573, 0.629)
0.605 (0.571, 0.639)
Table 26: Zero-shot segmentation performance on SICAP (n = 31) in terms of Dice score as well as
precision and recall for the positive class. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
Model Name
Dice
Precision
Recall
CONCH
0.615 (0.597, 0.633)
0.663 (0.650, 0.675)
0.709 (0.693, 0.726)
PLIP
0.426 (0.411, 0.443)
0.526 (0.513, 0.537)
0.541 (0.528, 0.554)
BiomedCLIP
0.446 (0.430, 0.462)
0.581 (0.569, 0.592)
0.601 (0.588, 0.615)
OpenAICLIP
0.367 (0.351, 0.381)
0.492 (0.481, 0.503)
0.511 (0.498, 0.524)
Table 27: Zero-shot segmentation performance on DigestPath (n = 250) in terms of Dice score as well as
precision and recall for the positive class. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is included
in parentheses.
Model name
METEOR
ROUGE
CONCH
0.193 (0.181, 0.208)
0.215 (0.200, 0.229)
GIT-base
0.122 (0.115, 0.130)
0.135 (0.125, 0.145)
GIT-large
0.125 (0.117, 0.134)
0.153 (0.143, 0.163)
Table 28: Captioning performance with fine-tuning on Source A (train n = 558, validation n = 77, test
n = 162) in terms of METEOR and ROUGE. Best performing model for each metric is bolded. 95% CI is
included in parentheses.
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
Hyperparameter
Value
Automatic mixed precision
fp16
Batch size
384
Gradient accumulation
4
Weight decay
0.2
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
Temperature
Learned
Peak learning rate
1e-4
Learning rate schedule
Cosine
Warmup steps
250
Epochs
40
Table 29: Hyperparameters used in visual-language pretraining. 8 × 80GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs were
used for training. Effective batch size used for optimization is batch size × gradient accumulation steps. The
maximum sequence length for captions is set to 128.
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
Hyperparameter
Value
Layers
12
Heads
12
Patch size
16
Head activation
GELU
Embedding dimension
768
Drop path rate
0.1
Global crop scale
0.32, 1.0
Global crop number
2
Local crop scale
0.05, 0.32
Local crop number
10
Partial prediction shape
Block
Partial prediction ratio
0.3
Partial prediction variance
0.2
Gradient clipping max norm
0.3
Normalize last layer
✓
Shared head
✓
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
Batch size
1024
Freeze last layer epochs
3
Warmup epochs
10
Warmup teacher temperature epochs
30
Max epochs
80
Learning rate schedule
Cosine
Learning rate (start)
0
Learning rate (post warmup)
2e-3
Learning rate (final)
2e-6
Teacher temperature (start)
0.04
Teacher temperature (final)
0.4
Teacher momentum (start)
0.996
Teacher momentum (final)
1.000
Weight decay (start)
0.04
Weight decay (end)
0.4
Automatic mixed precision
fp16
Table 30: Hyperparameters used in pretraining the vision model. 4 × 80GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs were
used for training. Batch size refers to the total batch size across GPUs.
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
Hyperparameter
Value
Layers
24
Heads
12
Embedding dimension
768
Hidden dimension
3,072
Max. sequence length
512
Pos. embedding
Absolute
Vocabulary size
32,000
Automatic mixed precision
fp16
Batch size
64
Gradient accumulation
8
Weight decay
0.01
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
Peak learnng rate
1e-3
Learning rate schedule
Linear
Warmup steps
500
Training steps
15,000
Table 31: Hyperparameters used in pretraining the language model. In-house pathology reports were first
de-identified using regex pattern matching before tokenization. 4 × 80GB NVIDIA A100 GPUs were used for
training. Batch size refers to the total batch size across GPUs. Effective batch size used for optimization is
batch size × gradient accumulation steps. The sequence length of training examples was set to the maximum
sequence length supported by the model (i.e. 512).
Hyperparameter
Value
Batch size
1
Weight decay
1e-5
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
Peak learning rate
1e-4
Learning rate schedule
Cosine
Epochs
20
Table 32: Hyperparameters used in slide-level supervised classification. A single 24GB NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3090 GPU was used for each ABMIL model using weakly-supervised learning and slide-level labels.
Hyperparameter
Value
Batch size
16
Weight decay
0.2
AdamW β
(0.9, 0.999)
Learning rate
1e-4
Warmup steps
10
Early stopping patience
10
Epochs
40
Table 33: Hyperparameters used in caption fine-tuning. A single 24GB NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU
was used for training. The maximum sequence length for captions is set to 128. Top-K sampling with K = 50
was used as decoding strategy at generation time.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
CLASSNAME.
a photomicrograph showing CLASSNAME.
a photomicrograph of CLASSNAME.
an image of CLASSNAME.
an image showing CLASSNAME.
an example of CLASSNAME.
CLASSNAME is shown.
this is CLASSNAME.
there is CLASSNAME.
a histopathological image showing CLASSNAME.
a histopathological image of CLASSNAME.
a histopathological photograph of CLASSNAME.
a histopathological photograph showing CLASSNAME.
shows CLASSNAME.
presence of CLASSNAME.
CLASSNAME is present.
an H&E stained image of CLASSNAME.
an H&E stained image showing CLASSNAME.
an H&E image showing CLASSNAME.
an H&E image of CLASSNAME.
CLASSNAME, H&E stain.
CLASSNAME, H&E.
Table 34:
Prompt templates used for all tasks involving prompts.
The name of the class replaces
CLASSNAME. See Tables 35-38 for class prompts of each task.
47

===== PAGE 48 =====
Task
Class
Class names
TCGA BRCA
IDC
invasive ductal carcinoma
breast invasive ductal carcinoma
invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast
invasive carcinoma of the breast, ductal pattern
breast IDC
ILC
invasive lobular carcinoma
breast invasive lobular carcinoma
invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast
invasive carcinoma of the breast, lobular pattern
breast ILC
TCGA NSCLC
LUAD
adenocarcinoma
lung adenocarcinoma
adenocarcinoma of the lung
LUAD
LUSC
squamous cell carcinoma
lung squamous cell carcinoma
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung
LUSC
TCGA RCC
CCRCC
clear cell renal cell carcinoma
renal cell carcinoma, clear cell type
renal cell carcinoma of the clear cell type
clear cell RCC
PRCC
papillary renal cell carcinoma
renal cell carcinoma, papillary type
renal cell carcinoma of the papillary type
papillary RCC
CHRCC
chromophobe renal cell carcinoma
renal cell carcinoma, chromophobe type
renal cell carcinoma of the chromophobe type
chromophobe RCC
Table 35: Class prompts for BRCA, NSCLC, and RCC subtyping.
48

===== PAGE 49 =====
Task
Class
Class names
DHMC
LUAD
papillary
papillary pattern adenocarcinoma
papillary pattern adenocarcinoma of the lung
lung adenocarcinoma, papillary growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma with a predominantly papillary growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma, papillary predominant histological subtype
solid
solid pattern adenocarcinoma
solid pattern adenocarcinoma of the lung
lung adenocarcinoma, solid growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma with a predominantly solid growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma, solid predominant histological subtype
micropapillary
micropapillary pattern adenocarcinoma
micropapillary pattern adenocarcinoma of the lung
lung adenocarcinoma, micropapillary growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma with a predominantly micropapillary growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma, micropapillary predominant histological subtype
acinar
acinar pattern adenocarcinoma
acinar pattern adenocarcinoma of the lung
lung adenocarcinoma, acinar growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma with a predominantly acinar growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma, acinar predominant histological subtype
leipidic
leipidic pattern adenocarcinoma
leipidic pattern adenocarcinoma of the lung
lung adenocarcinoma, leipidic growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma with a predominantly leipidic growth pattern
lung adenocarcinoma, leipidic predominant histological subtype
Table 36: Class prompts for DHMC LUAD pattern classification.
49

===== PAGE 50 =====
Task
Class
Class names
CRC100k
ADI
adipose
adipose tissue
adipocytes
fat
fat cells
BACK
background
penmarking
empty space
background artifacts
DEB
debris
colorectal adenocarcinoma debris and necrosis
necrosis
necrotic debris
LYM
lymphocytes
lymphoid aggregate
immune cells
lymphoid infiltrate
inflammatory cells
MUC
mucus
mucin
mucus pool
mucin pool
MUS
smooth muscle
smooth muscle tissue
muscle
muscularis propria
muscularis mucosa
NORM
normal colon mucosa
uninvolved colon mucosa
benign colon mucosa
benign epithelium
STR
cancer-associated stroma
tumor-associated stroma
stromal cells
stromal tissue
stroma
TUM
colorectal adenocarcinoma epithelium
colorectal adenocarcinoma
tumor
adenocarcinoma
malignant epithelium
Table 37: Class prompts for CRC100k. The Class column refers to the original class names used in the
CRC100k dataset99.
50

===== PAGE 51 =====
Task
Class
Class names
WSSS4LUAD
normal
non-tumor
normal tissue
non-cancerous tissue
stroma
tumor-associated stroma
cancer-associated stroma
tumor-associated stromal tissue
cancer-associated stromal tissue
tumor
tumor tissue
tumor epithelial tissue
cancerous tissue
SICAP
NC
non-cancerous tissue
non-cancerous prostate tissue
benign tissue
benign glands
benign prostate tissue
benign prostate glands
G3
gleason grade 3
gleason pattern 3
prostate cancer, gleason grade 3
prostate cancer, gleason pattern 3
prostate adenocarcinoma, well-differentiated
well-differentiated prostatic adenocarcinoma
G4
gleason grade 4
gleason pattern 4
prostate cancer, gleason grade 4
prostate cancer, gleason pattern 4
prostate adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated
moderately differentiated prostatic adenocarcinoma
G5
gleason grade 5
gleason pattern 5
prostate cancer, gleason grade 5
prostate cancer, gleason pattern 5
prostate adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated
poorly differentiated prostatic adenocarcinoma
Tumor
prostatic adenocarcinoma
adenocarcinoma
prostate cancer
tumor tissue
cancerous tissue
DigestPath
Benign
benign tissue
benign colon tissue
benign colorectal tissue
benign rectal tissue
Malignant
malignant tissue
malignant colon tissue
malignant colorectal tissue
malignant rectal tissue
Table 38: Class prompts for WSSS4LUAD, SICAP, and DigestPath. SICAP ROI-level classification uses
the prompts for NC through G5. SICAP slide-level tumor segmentation uses prompts for NC and Tumor.
51

===== PAGE 52 =====
References
1. Huang, S.-C. et al. Deep neural network trained on gigapixel images improves lymph node metastasis
detection in clinical settings. Nature communications 13, 3347 (2022).
2. Litjens, G. et al. 1399 h&e-stained sentinel lymph node sections of breast cancer patients: the camelyon
dataset. GigaScience 7, giy065 (2018).
3. Campanella, G. et al. Clinical-grade computational pathology using weakly supervised deep learning on
whole slide images. Nature medicine 25, 1301–1309 (2019).
4. Coudray, N. et al. Classification and mutation prediction from non–small cell lung cancer histopathology
images using deep learning. Nature medicine 24, 1559–1567 (2018).
5. Lu, M. Y. et al. Data-efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole-slide images.
Nature biomedical engineering 5, 555–570 (2021).
6. Skrede, O.-J. et al. Deep learning for prediction of colorectal cancer outcome: a discovery and validation
study. The Lancet 395, 350–360 (2020).
7. Chen, R. J. et al. Pan-cancer integrative histology-genomic analysis via multimodal deep learning. Can-
cer Cell 40, 865–878 (2022).
8. Courtiol, P. et al. Deep learning-based classification of mesothelioma improves prediction of patient
outcome. Nature medicine 25, 1519–1525 (2019).
9. Lu, M. Y. et al. Ai-based pathology predicts origins for cancers of unknown primary. Nature 594,
106–110 (2021).
10. Zhu, L. et al. An accurate prediction of the origin for bone metastatic cancer using deep learning on
digital pathological images. EBioMedicine 87 (2023).
11. Chen, C. et al. Fast and scalable search of whole-slide images via self-supervised deep learning. Nature
Biomedical Engineering 6, 1420–1434 (2022).
12. Kalra, S. et al. Yottixel–an image search engine for large archives of histopathology whole slide images.
Medical Image Analysis 65, 101757 (2020).
13. Hegde, N. et al. Similar image search for histopathology: Smily. NPJ digital medicine 2, 56 (2019).
14. Bulten, W. et al. Automated deep-learning system for gleason grading of prostate cancer using biopsies:
a diagnostic study. The Lancet Oncology 21, 233–241 (2020).
15. Nagpal, K. et al. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for improving gleason scoring
of prostate cancer. NPJ digital medicine 2, 48 (2019).
16. Abels, E. et al. Computational pathology definitions, best practices, and recommendations for regulatory
guidance: a white paper from the digital pathology association. The Journal of pathology 249, 286–294
(2019).
17. Ehteshami Bejnordi, B. et al. Diagnostic Assessment of Deep Learning Algorithms for Detection of
Lymph Node Metastases in Women With Breast Cancer. JAMA 318, 2199–2210 (2017).
18. Lee, Y., Park, J., Oh, S. et al. Derivation of prognostic contextual histopathological features from whole-
slide images of tumours via graph deep learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng (2022).
19. Lu, C. et al. A prognostic model for overall survival of patients with early-stage non-small cell lung
cancer: a multicentre, retrospective study. The Lancet Digital Health 2, e594–e606 (2020).
52

===== PAGE 53 =====
20. Kather, J. N. et al. Pan-cancer image-based detection of clinically actionable genetic alterations. Nature
cancer 1, 789–799 (2020).
21. Saldanha, O. L. et al. Self-supervised attention-based deep learning for pan-cancer mutation prediction
from histopathology. NPJ Precision Oncology 7, 35 (2023).
22. Echle, A. et al. Deep learning in cancer pathology: a new generation of clinical biomarkers. British
journal of cancer 124, 686–696 (2021).
23. Beck, A. H. et al. Systematic analysis of breast cancer morphology uncovers stromal features associated
with survival. Science translational medicine 3 (2011).
24. Yala, A. et al. Optimizing risk-based breast cancer screening policies with reinforcement learning. Nature
medicine 28, 136–143 (2022).
25. Tarantino, P., Mazzarella, L., Marra, A., Trapani, D. & Curigliano, G.
The evolving paradigm of
biomarker actionability: histology-agnosticism as a spectrum, rather than a binary quality. Cancer Treat-
ment Reviews 94, 102169 (2021).
26. Madabhushi, A. & Lee, G. Image analysis and machine learning in digital pathology: Challenges and
opportunities. Medical image analysis 33, 170–175 (2016).
27. Zhou, Y. et al. Multi-site cross-organ calibrated deep learning (muscld): Automated diagnosis of non-
melanoma skin cancer. Medical image analysis 84, 102702 (2023).
28. Laleh, N. G. et al. Benchmarking weakly-supervised deep learning pipelines for whole slide classification
in computational pathology. Medical image analysis 79 (2022).
29. Shmatko, A., Ghaffari Laleh, N., Gerstung, M. & Kather, J. N. Artificial intelligence in histopathology:
enhancing cancer research and clinical oncology. Nature Cancer 3, 1026–1038 (2022).
30. Graham, S. et al. Hover-net: Simultaneous segmentation and classification of nuclei in multi-tissue
histology images. Medical image analysis 58, 101563 (2019).
31. Mobadersany, P. et al. Predicting cancer outcomes from histology and genomics using convolutional
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, E2970–E2979 (2018).
32. Cheerla,
A. & Gevaert,
O.
Deep learning with multimodal representation for pancancer
prognosis prediction.
Bioinformatics 35, i446–i454 (2019).
URL https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btz342.
https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-pdf/35/14/i446/28913346/btz342.pdf.
33. Chen, R. J. et al. Multimodal co-attention transformer for survival prediction in gigapixel whole slide
images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 4015–4025
(2021).
34. Wang, Z., Yu, L., Ding, X., Liao, X. & Wang, L. Shared-specific feature learning with bottleneck fusion
transformer for multi-modal whole slide image analysis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2023).
35. Fu, Y. et al. Pan-cancer computational histopathology reveals mutations, tumor composition and prog-
nosis. Nature cancer 1, 800–810 (2020).
36. Carrillo-Perez, F. et al. Rna-to-image multi-cancer synthesis using cascaded diffusion models. bioRxiv
2023–01 (2023).
37. Jing, Y. et al. Multi-omics prediction of immune-related adverse events during checkpoint immunother-
apy. Nature Communications 11, 1–7 (2020).
53

===== PAGE 54 =====
38. Sammut, S.-J. et al. Multi-omic machine learning predictor of breast cancer therapy response. Nature
601, 623–629 (2022).
39. Boehm, K. M. et al. Multimodal data integration using machine learning improves risk stratification of
high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Nature cancer 3, 723–733 (2022).
40. Weng, W.-H., Cai, Y., Lin, A., Tan, F. & Chen, P.-H. C. Multimodal multitask representation learning for
pathology biobank metadata prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07846 (2019).
41. Dwivedi, C. et al. Multi stain graph fusion for multimodal integration in pathology. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1835–1845 (2022).
42. Huang, Z. et al.
Artificial intelligence reveals features associated with breast cancer neoadjuvant
chemotherapy responses from multi-stain histopathologic images. NPJ Precision Oncology 7, 14 (2023).
43. Foersch, S. et al. Multistain deep learning for prediction of prognosis and therapy response in colorectal
cancer. Nature medicine 29, 430–439 (2023).
44. Vanguri, R. S. et al. Multimodal integration of radiology, pathology and genomics for prediction of
response to pd-(l) 1 blockade in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Nature cancer 3, 1151–1164
(2022).
45. Radford, A. et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International
conference on machine learning, 8748–8763 (PMLR, 2021).
46. Jia, C. et al. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 4904–4916 (PMLR, 2021).
47. Yu, J. et al.
Coca:
Contrastive captioners are image-text foundation models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.01917 (2022).
48. Li, J., Li, D., Xiong, C. & Hoi, S. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-
language understanding and generation.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 12888–
12900 (PMLR, 2022).
49. Schuhmann, C. et al. Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 25278–25294 (2022).
50. Dou, Z.-Y. et al. An empirical study of training end-to-end vision-and-language transformers. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 18166–18176 (2022).
51. Li, J. et al. Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum distillation.
Advances in neural information processing systems 34, 9694–9705 (2021).
52. Chen, Y.-C. et al. Uniter: Universal image-text representation learning. In European conference on
computer vision, 104–120 (Springer, 2020).
53. Singh, A. et al. Flava: A foundational language and vision alignment model. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 15638–15650 (2022).
54. Li, H. et al. Uni-perceiver v2: A generalist model for large-scale vision and vision-language tasks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2691–2700
(2023).
55. Lu, J., Batra, D., Parikh, D. & Lee, S. Vilbert: Pretraining task-agnostic visiolinguistic representations
for vision-and-language tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
56. Alayrac, J.-B. et al. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35, 23716–23736 (2022).
54

===== PAGE 55 =====
57. Li, Y., Fan, H., Hu, R., Feichtenhofer, C. & He, K. Scaling language-image pre-training via masking. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 23390–23400
(2023).
58. Wang, W. et al. Image as a foreign language: Beit pretraining for vision and vision-language tasks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 19175–19186
(2023).
59. Recasens, A. et al. Zorro: the masked multimodal transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09595 (2023).
60. Boag, W. et al. Baselines for chest x-ray report generation. In Machine learning for health workshop,
126–140 (PMLR, 2020).
61. Endo, M., Krishnan, R., Krishna, V., Ng, A. Y. & Rajpurkar, P.
Retrieval-based chest x-ray report
generation using a pre-trained contrastive language-image model. In Machine Learning for Health, 209–
219 (PMLR, 2021).
62. Chen, Z., Song, Y., Chang, T.-H. & Wan, X. Generating radiology reports via memory-driven trans-
former. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), 1439–1449 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2020). URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.112.
63. Miura, Y., Zhang, Y., Tsai, E., Langlotz, C. & Jurafsky, D.
Improving factual completeness and
consistency of image-to-text radiology report generation.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 5288–5304 (Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, 2021). URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.416.
64. Liu, G. et al. Clinically accurate chest x-ray report generation. In Doshi-Velez, F. et al. (eds.) Proceedings
of the 4th Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, vol. 106 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, 249–269 (PMLR, 2019). URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v106/liu19a.
html.
65. Tiu, E. et al.
Expert-level detection of pathologies from unannotated chest x-ray images via self-
supervised learning. Nature Biomedical Engineering 6, 1399–1406 (2022).
66. Huang, S.-C., Shen, L., Lungren, M. P. & Yeung, S. Gloria: A multimodal global-local representa-
tion learning framework for label-efficient medical image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 3942–3951 (2021).
67. Zhang, Y., Jiang, H., Miura, Y., Manning, C. D. & Langlotz, C. P. Contrastive learning of medical visual
representations from paired images and text. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 2–25
(PMLR, 2022).
68. Zhang, S. et al.
Large-scale domain-specific pretraining for biomedical vision-language processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915 (2023).
69. Wang, Z., Wu, Z., Agarwal, D. & Sun, J. Medclip: Contrastive learning from unpaired medical images
and text. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
3876–3887 (2022).
70. Schaumberg, A. J. et al. Interpretable multimodal deep learning for real-time pan-tissue pan-disease
pathology search on social media. Modern pathology 33, 2169–2185 (2020).
71. Maleki, D. & Tizhoosh, H. R. Lile: Look in-depth before looking elsewhere–a dual attention network
using transformers for cross-modal information retrieval in histopathology archives. In International
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 879–894 (PMLR, 2022).
55

===== PAGE 56 =====
72. Zhang, H. et al.
Pathnarratives: Data annotation for pathological human-ai collaborative diagnosis.
Frontiers in Medicine 9, 1070072 (2023).
73. Tsuneki, M. & Kanavati, F.
Inference of captions from histopathological patches.
In International
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 1235–1250 (PMLR, 2022).
74. Zhang, R., Weber, C., Grossman, R. & Khan, A. A. Evaluating and interpreting caption prediction for
histopathology images. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, 418–435 (PMLR, 2020).
75. Naseem, U., Khushi, M. & Kim, J. Vision-language transformer for interpretable pathology visual ques-
tion answering. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 27, 1681–1690 (2022).
76. He, X. Towards visual question answering on pathology images. In Proceedings of the 59th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics and the 11th international joint conference on
natural language processing, vol. 2 (2021).
77. Huang, Z., Bianchi, F., Yuksekgonul, M., Montine, T. & Zou, J. Leveraging medical twitter to build a
visual–language foundation model for pathology ai. bioRxiv 2023–03 (2023).
78. Gamper, J. & Rajpoot, N. Multiple instance captioning: Learning representations from histopathology
textbooks and articles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 16549–16559 (2021).
79. Lu, M. Y. et al. Visual language pretrained multiple instance zero-shot transfer for histopathology images.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 19764–19775
(2023).
80. Lin, W. et al. Pmc-clip: Contrastive language-image pre-training using biomedical documents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.07240 (2023).
81. Ilse, M., Tomczak, J. & Welling, M. Attention-based deep multiple instance learning. In International
conference on machine learning, 2127–2136 (PMLR, 2018).
82. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 770–778 (2016).
83. Deng, J. et al. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 248–255 (2009).
84. Wang, X. et al. Transformer-based unsupervised contrastive learning for histopathological image classi-
fication. Medical image analysis 81, 102559 (2022).
85. Kundra, R. et al. Oncotree: a cancer classification system for precision oncology. JCO clinical cancer
informatics 5, 221–230 (2021).
86. Wang, J. et al. Git: A generative image-to-text transformer for vision and language. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14100 (2022).
87. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S. & Hoi, S. Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen
image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597 (2023).
88. Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R. & Farhadi, A. You only look once: Unified, real-time object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 779–788
(2016).
89. Luo, R. et al. Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining.
Briefings in Bioinformatics 23 (2022).
56

===== PAGE 57 =====
90. Dosovitskiy, A. et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (2021).
91. Zhou, J. et al. Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
92. Silva-Rodriguez, J., Colomer, A., Dolz, J. & Naranjo, V. Self-learning for weakly supervised gleason
grading of local patterns. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 25, 3094–3104 (2021).
93. Dice, L. R. Measures of the amount of ecologic association between species. Ecology 26, 297–302
(1945).
94. Kolesnikov, A., Zhai, X. & Beyer, L. Revisiting self-supervised visual representation learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 1920–1929 (2019).
95. Banerjee, S. & Lavie, A. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with
human judgments. In Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for
machine translation and/or summarization, 65–72 (2005).
96. Lin, C.-Y. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches
out, 74–81 (2004).
97. Fan, A., Lewis, M. & Dauphin, Y. Hierarchical neural story generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04833
(2018).
98. Wei, J. W. et al. Pathologist-level classification of histologic patterns on resected lung adenocarcinoma
slides with deep neural networks. Scientific reports 9, 3358 (2019).
99. Kather, J. N. et al. Predicting survival from colorectal cancer histology slides using deep learning: A
retrospective multicenter study. PLoS medicine 16, e1002730 (2019).
100. Han, C. et al. Wsss4luad: Grand challenge on weakly-supervised tissue semantic segmentation for lung
adenocarcinoma (arXiv, 2022).
101. Da, Q. et al. Digestpath: A benchmark dataset with challenge review for the pathological detection and
segmentation of digestive-system. Medical Image Analysis 80, 102485 (2022).
57
