
===== PAGE 1 =====
Latent Gene Diffusion for Spatial Transcriptomics Completion
Paula C´ardenasB, Leonardo Manrique∗, Daniela Vega∗, Daniela Ruiz, Pablo Arbel´aez
Center for Research and Formation in Artificial Intelligence
Universidad de los Andes, Bogot´a, Colombia
{p.cardenasg,dl.manrique,d.vegaa,da.ruizl1,pa.arbelaez}@uniandes.edu.co
Abstract
Computer Vision has proven to be a powerful tool for an-
alyzing Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) data. However, cur-
rent models that predict spatially resolved gene expression
from histopathology images suffer from significant limita-
tions due to data dropout. Most existing approaches rely
on single-cell RNA sequencing references, making them de-
pendent on alignment quality and external datasets while
also risking batch effects and inherited dropout. In this pa-
per, we address these limitations by introducing LGDiST,
the first reference-free latent gene diffusion model for ST
data dropout. We show that LGDiST outperforms the pre-
vious state-of-the-art in gene expression completion, with
an average Mean Squared Error that is 18% lower across
26 datasets. Furthermore, we demonstrate that completing
ST data with LGDiST improves gene expression prediction
performance on six state-of-the-art methods up to 10% in
MSE. A key innovation of LGDiST is using context genes
previously considered uninformative to build a rich and bio-
logically meaningful genetic latent space. Our experiments
show that removing key components of LGDiST, such as the
context genes, the ST latent space, and the neighbor condi-
tioning, leads to considerable drops in performance. These
findings underscore that the full architecture of LGDiST
achieves substantially better performance than any of its
isolated components.
1. Introduction
The emergence of Spatial Transcriptomics (ST) is one of
the most groundbreaking advances in biological research
over the last five years [16]. This technology bridges the
gap between genetic expression and cellular spatial organi-
zation by combining single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-
seq) and histology in a single tool [26]. ST technologies can
be broadly categorized into imaging-based and sequencing-
based methods. Imaging-based technologies achieve single-
*These authors contributed equally to this work
cell resolution but have very limited sequence coverage
[26], whereas sequencing-based technologies have a low
spot-level resolution but offer high throughput [4].
In
this work, we focus on sequencing-based ST technologies,
which measure gene expression in spatially localized bulk
regions rather than at the level of individual cells.
Despite its advantages, ST is a resource-demanding tech-
nology that involves expensive devices, complex sample
handling, and is time-consuming [9].
In response, on-
going research has introduced multiple Computer Vision
(CV) models to automate ST by predicting a tissue’s spa-
tially resolved genetic expressions solely from histopathol-
ogy images [27].
Proposed gene expression prediction
models leverage a wide range of CV techniques and Ar-
tificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms with varied complexi-
ties, from simple Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
[7] to Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [30] and contrastive
learning techniques [27, 29]. Nevertheless, another critical
but frequently overlooked limitation of ST is data dropout.
This phenomenon refers to the stochastic failure to detect
gene transcripts in a spot, even when they are expressed [6].
Dropouts introduce noise into ST data and hinder the util-
ity of this technology. Moreover, noise in ST datasets not
only affects genetic analyses but seriously degrades the per-
formance of CV models trained for a wide variety of image-
processing tasks, including gene expression prediction from
histopathology images, spatial domain detection, cellular
segmentation and classification, and computer-aided diag-
nosis [5, 11, 13].
The dropout problem has received increasing attention
in recent years due to its significant impact on the effec-
tive processing of ST data [1, 3, 12, 14, 24].
However,
most of these works are primarily suitable for imaging-
based technologies, given their inherent focus on single-cell
information. This paradigm limits the applicability of these
methods for data completion and leaves the dropout prob-
lem unresolved for ST data measured through bulk tran-
scriptomics. Additionally, most methods previously pro-
posed are based on scRNA-seq references to accurately pre-
dict missing genetic values. This reliance not only makes
arXiv:2509.01864v1  [cs.CV]  2 Sep 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
Spatial Graph
Expression Map per Gene 
with Dropout
LGDiST
Spatial Graph Completed
Neighborhood 
Completed
Central 
Spot
Missing 
Data
n Genes
Neighbor 
Spot
Neighborhood 
with Dropout
Figure 1. Spatial Transcriptomics Completion Pipeline. LGDiST processes ST neighborhoods to infer missing values, generating a
completed expression map with high-quality data.
the models highly sensitive to the quality of external data
but also increases the challenge of addressing dropout in
sequencing-based ST, given its lower resolution.
To overcome the limitations mentioned above, this pa-
per introduces Latent Gene Diffusion for Spatial Transcrip-
tomics (LGDiST), a novel reference-free generative model
designed to complete missing gene expression values in
ST data. Our approach builds on the remarkable success
of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [8]
in image generation and biology-related applications, in-
cluding small molecule generation, protein structure pre-
diction [25], and, more recently, gene expression prediction
from histopathology images [31]. To enhance our method,
we also draw inspiration from the ability of AutoEncoders
(AEs) to capture complex patterns in data and build highly
informative latent spaces [2]. LGDiST utilizes an AE to
build an ST latent space incorporating Highly Spatially As-
sociated Genes (HSAGs) and additional genes with lower
Moran’s I, which we consider as context genes (CGs). Fur-
thermore, we employ a Diffusion Transformer (DiT) [21]
conditioned on the encoded genetic data from the neighbor-
ing spots to complete missing values in the central spot.
We perform multiple comparative experiments across the
26 sequencing-based ST datasets in the SpaRED database
[18], assessing our model against leading methods on
dropout data completion. The results show a noteworthy
improvement in the prediction of missing data with an av-
erage 18% reduction in Mean Square Error (MSE) across
all the datasets explored compared to the state-of-the-art in
reference-free ST data completion. Additionally, we exam-
ine the significance of LGDiST by quantifying its impact on
the performance of models designed to predict total gene
expression profiles from histopathology images. We find
that LGDiST effectively cleans up training data, allowing
these state-of-the-art models to learn from higher quality
information and subsequently improve their own evaluation
metrics up to 10%. These results establish LGDiST as a
superior approach for addressing data dropout in ST and
highlight its potential to enhance downstream CV analyses,
ultimately advancing the accuracy and reliability of spatial
transcriptomics studies.
To summarize, our main contributions are:
1. We introduce the first generative, reference-free model
for addressing data dropout in ST and prove its ability to
optimize the performance of CV models trained on ST
data.
2. We design a latent space for ST data and show that con-
ducting diffusion within it enhances gene expression re-
covery.
3. We demonstrate the value of low spatially autocorrelated
genes in spatial analyses, presenting a new way of har-
nessing data previously considered uninformative.
To promote further research on ST, our source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/BCV-
Uniandes/LGDiST.
2. Related Work
To mitigate the effect of data dropout, previous works have
proposed various methods that aim to complete missing val-
ues in ST datasets. These methods can generally be di-
vided into two main categories based on whether they re-
quire external references or rely solely on the ST data itself:
reference-based and reference-free approaches. Each cat-
egory has distinct advantages and limitations, which have
driven the development of increasingly sophisticated strate-
gies to address the inherent challenges posed by dropout in
spatial transcriptomics.
2.1. Reference-based methods
Reference-based methods [1, 12, 24] attempt to enhance
the completeness of ST datasets by leveraging information
from scRNA-seq data as an external reference. By align-
ing gene expression profiles measured in spatial spots with
those obtained from single-cell technologies, these meth-
ods aim to predict the missing values on the expression
map of each gene. A representative example of this strat-
egy is stDiff [12], which utilizes DDPMs [8] to model the
relationships between gene expression abundances based
on scRNA-seq-derived references. This modeling enables
highly informed predictions of missing expression values
based on prior knowledge of genetic expression profiles.
Nonetheless, incorporating scRNA-seq references into

===== PAGE 3 =====
Reconstructed Gene Expression 
Neighborhood 
...
Gene Expression 
Neighborhood 
 
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Encoder
Decoder
...
...
...
...
...
...
Reconstruction Loss
Positional
Encoding
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Spots
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Spots
Figure 2. AutoEncoder training framework. We add a 2D positional encoding to the gene expression neighborhood X before passing
it through an encoder Eθ that maps it to a Latent Space Representation XE. The decoder Dϕ then reconstructs the input from the latent
space, aiming to minimize reconstruction loss.
the completion process significantly increases the computa-
tional resources and experimental data requirements, since
high-quality scRNA-seq datasets must be collected, pro-
cessed, and aligned with the ST samples. Moreover, differ-
ences in sequencing technologies or protocols can introduce
inconsistencies or batch effects that propagate into the com-
pleted ST data, compromising its reliability and introducing
biases that may affect downstream analyses [15]. Impor-
tantly, reference-based models depend on alignment qual-
ity, which remains suboptimal despite ongoing advance-
ments, potentially introducing bias in the completed data
[28]. Recognizing these limitations, we propose a model
that works entirely without scRNA-seq references, thereby
eliminating dependence on external datasets and avoiding
risks associated with alignment performance.
This ap-
proach makes LGDiST broadly applicable to bulk ST data
and suitable for tissues lacking existing reference informa-
tion, while minimizing potential biases.
2.2. Reference-free methods
Reference-free methods [22] complete missing values us-
ing only the information contained within the ST dataset
itself. These methods avoid dependence on external refer-
ences and are often more adaptable to a wider range of sam-
ples and experimental conditions. In [17], authors propose
a median-completion strategy that operates as a reference-
free method. This method uses a modified adaptive median
filter to replace dropout values with the median expression
of the gene of interest in a local region surrounding the
missing spot. In case the region lacks sufficient data, the
missing values are substituted with the median value of the
whole slide image (WSI). This strategy proved to be help-
ful as an initial approach to reduce the effect of data dropout
for gene prediction methods. Despite its practicality, relying
on median imputation alone can excessively smooth the ex-
pression patterns of genes across the tissue, diminishing bi-
ologically relevant spatial variability. Furthermore, median
completion lacks the robustness required to handle datasets
with a high fraction of dropout, where too many missing
values make the median estimate unreliable.
More
advanced
reference-free
methods,
such
as
SpaCKLE [18], address the dropout problem by adopting
a masked autoencoder architecture that learns patterns of
gene expression directly from the spatial data. SpaCKLE
represents a significant advancement, utilizing a deep
learning framework and achieving superior performance
compared to previous methods.
However, it focuses
exclusively on HSAGs, which are selected based on their
Moran’s I scores [19]. This narrow focus overlooks genes
with low spatial autocorrelation, which can still provide
valuable context and biological insights.
By discarding
these low-autocorrelation genes,
SpaCKLE limits its
capacity to capture a broader and more comprehensive
molecular context within the tissue.
In contrast,
LGDiST explicitly incorporates a la-
tent space that encompasses both HSAGs and low-
autocorrelation genes that serve as context.
This design
choice enables our model to leverage a richer set of genetic
information, improving its ability to reconstruct missing ex-
pression values in a way that better preserves both local and
global spatial expression patterns.
3. Latent Gene Diffusion
3.1. Overview
LGDiST consists of two main components: an AE (shown
in Fig. 2) that builds a compact but highly informative latent
space for ST data, and a diffusion model (Fig. 3) trained
to generate the missing gene expression profile of a spot
conditioned on the information from its nearest neighbors.

===== PAGE 4 =====
...
Gene Expression 
Neighborhood 
 
...
...
...
...
...
...
Completed Gene Expression
Central Spot
...
Missing Data Mask
...
Completed Data
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Encoder
Decoder
...
DiT
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Completed Gene
Expression Neighborhood
...
...
...
...
...
Condition
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Spots
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Spots
HSGAs
HSGAs
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Completed Gene Expression 
Neighborhood
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Spots
Genes (HSAGs and CGs)
Completed Gene Expression
Central Spot
HSGAs
a. LGDiST Training Process
b. LGDiST Inference Process
Filter-out CGs
Spots
Latent Dimension
Figure 3. (a) LGDiST Training: The encoder Eθ maps the gene expression neighborhood X to XE. We feed this representation to the
DiT with the condition C and t. Through an iterative noising-denoising process, the DiT learns to predict the noise in ˜
XE,t. After learning
how to remove the noise, the DiT outputs ˜
XE, t = 0 and Dϕ decodes the result to obtain the final gene expression matrix. (b) LGDiST
Inference: After obtaining the completed gene expression neighborhood, we filter out the CGs and obtain the final completed data.
We define X ∈R(n+1)×g as the matrix representing the
genetic expression profile of a neighborhood, where g is the
number of genes and n denotes the number of closest neigh-
bors for a given spot in the hexagonal geometry of Visium
ST data. Consequently, we construct a neighborhood for
each spot to consider its local context during data process-
ing.
Our methodology follows a structured two-stage train-
ing process. First, we train the AE to build a latent space
for ST neighborhoods. Once trained, we use this model
to encode and decode the input and output of the DiT, re-
spectively. During the second stage, we train the DiT con-
ditioned on the latent representation of ST neighborhoods.
This approach follows a latent diffusion strategy as pro-
posed in [23], which accelerates training and reduces mem-
ory requirements during both training and inference in the
diffusion framework. Thus, instead of employing existing
genetic foundation models to obtain gene expression em-
beddings, which may not capture the neighborhood-level
structure our framework requires, we design and train our
own AE that both embeds the expression profiles and de-
codes them once the diffusion process is complete.
3.2. Genomics-Based Latent Space
We propose an autoencoder (AE) architecture consisting
of a four-layer transformer-based encoder with a single at-
tention head, followed by a two-layer multilayer percep-
tron (MLP) decoder. Both the encoder and decoder use a
dropout rate of 0.1 and the hyperbolic tangent activation
function. As shown in Fig. 2, we feed our encoder with Xp,
which corresponds to the gene expression matrix X with
added 2D positional encodings. Then we map Xp to the la-
tent space, obtaining XE ∈R(n+1)×d = Eθ(Xp), where d
corresponds to a latent dimension of 128. To enhance ro-
bustness, we apply a regularization mechanism that injects
noise into Xp during training with a probability of 50%.
For decoding, we use the MLP Dϕ to reconstruct the ex-
pression profile of the processed neighborhood based on its
latent representation XE. The final reconstructed expres-
sion matrix corresponds to ˆX ∈R(n+1)×g = Dϕ(XE).
We train the autoencoder to minimize an adjusted recon-
struction loss Lrec that prioritizes the columns correspond-
ing to the HSAGs through the use of a weighted factor α:
LHSAGs = MSE(XHSAGs, ˆXHSAGs)
(1)
LCGs = MSE(XCGs, ˆXCGs)
(2)
Lrec = α · LHSAGs + (1 −α)LCGs
(3)
3.3. Completing Missing Data with DDPMs
During the second stage of our model, we train a twelve-
layer DiT with sixteen attention heads to predict the ex-
pression values of all genes in the central spot using in-
formation from its nearest neighbors. We define the out-

===== PAGE 5 =====
put of each noising step in our diffusion process as de-
scribed in Eq. 4. Here, ε ∼N(0, I) is Gaussian noise, and
M ∈{0, 1}(n+1)×d is a binary mask that ensures only the
central spot’s row is noised while leaving the neighboring
spots’ data unchanged. The model learns to progressively
denoise ˜XE by estimating the added noise and removing it
iteratively. As shown in Fig. 3a, we condition the diffusion
process on C = M ⊙XE to ensure that the model relies
solely on the neighborhood information when reconstruct-
ing the central spot’s gene expression profile.
˜XE = (1 −M) ⊙ε + M ⊙XE
(4)
The model is trained to minimize the standard diffusion
loss in Eq. 5, where ˆεθ( ˜XE,t, C, t) is the model’s predicted
noise at timestep t based on the input noise ˜XE,t and the
condition C.
LDDP M = EXE,t,ε
h
∥ε −ˆεθ( ˜XE,t, C, t)∥2
2
i
(5)
After training our model to complete fully empty central
spots, we use it to tackle the real dropout problem, where
only a subset of genes in the central spot’s profile is miss-
ing. As shown in Fig. 3b, during inference we must decode
the DiT’s generated expressions and filter out CGs. Notably,
instead of retrieving the whole generated profile, we extract
only the values corresponding to the missing data. On the
other hand, when evaluating our model, we build a mask
that simulates data dropout by hiding values that were suc-
cessfully measured by the ST technology. This procedure
allows us to directly compare the predicted values against
the known ground truth measurements and compute reliable
evaluation metrics.
3.4. Implementation Details
Given the substantial amount of missing values in the orig-
inal ST data, we adopt the training strategy outlined in
[18]. This strategy includes pre-completing the data be-
fore training using the median completion technique from
[17], as detailed in section 2.2. We adopt this approach
since [18] demonstrates that data pre-completion acceler-
ates training convergence and ensures meaningful, non-zero
outputs. Furthermore, [18] shows that pre-completion im-
proves the performance of the final gene completion model
compared to training on the original data with missing val-
ues. This strategy also aligns with the reference-free nature
of our approach, as the median-completion technique fills
missing values using information already contained in the
ST dataset.
We train our model on an NVIDIA Quadro RTX 8000,
using an AdamW optimizer [10], and a batch size of 128.
The DiT backbone requires approximately 3.22 GFLOPs,
stDiff*
SpaCKLE
LGDist
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
MSE per dataset
MSE for all imputation methods on 26 SpaRED datasets
Figure 4. MSE of the three completion methods on each dataset.
stDiff* corresponds to an adjusted version of stDiff [12], modified
to work reference-free.
and we train it for 1500 epochs with a cosine noise sched-
uler and a learning rate of 1 × 10−4, with 1500 diffusion
steps during training and 50 diffusion steps for sampling.
The autoencoder follows a longer training process of 5000
epochs, with a learning rate of 1 × 10−6.
4. Experimental Results
4.1. Experimental Setup
We conduct experiments using the 26 publicly available
datasets in SpaRED [18], for both data completion and gene
expression prediction from histopathology images. The ex-
act details of the dataset composition are provided on the
SpaRED website. To focus only on genes with strong spa-
tial autocorrelation, SpaRED filters ST data using Moran’s
I, retaining either 32 or 128 genes with the highest spatial
autocorrelation scores for each dataset. We use SpaRED’s
suggested genes as our set of HSAGs. To include additional
context genes (CGs), we adopt the same pre-processing
strategy as described in [18], but we adjust the filtering cri-
teria to select 1,024 genes based on Moran’s I. This process
preserves each dataset’s original 32 or 128 HSAGs while
integrating the additional informative context genes. We
evaluate performance by computing the standard MSE met-
ric and Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) between the
ground truth and the completed or predicted expression val-
ues.
4.2. Missing Data Completion
We compare the performance of LGDiST on the data com-
pletion task against SpaCKLE [18], the previous state-of-

===== PAGE 6 =====
ENSG00000075624:
V10S29-108_B1
Masked Map
Ground Truth
LGDiST
MSE = 0.439
SpaCKLE
MSE = 1.049
11
12
13
14
15
16
Ground Truth
11
12
13
14
15
16
Prediction
Ground Truth
LGDiST
SpaCKLE
ENSG00000140416:
V10S29-108_B1
MSE = 0.365
MSE = 0.873
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Ground Truth
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Prediction
Ground Truth
LGDiST
SpaCKLE
6
8
10
12
14
16
6
8
10
12
14
16
Figure 5. Optimal qualitative results for data completion with LGDiST vs with SpaCKLE [18].
the-art among reference-free methods, and a modified ver-
sion of stDiff [12], which, like our method, employs DiT
for data completion. To ensure a fair comparison, we adapt
stDiff to work exclusively with ST data by restructuring its
diffusion conditioning, ensuring it no longer relies on exter-
nal information.
Fig. 4 displays the distribution of the MSE values ob-
tained by the three models when completing missing data on
each one of the 26 datasets. These results demonstrate that
LGDiST consistently outperforms the previous state-of-the-
art with an average MSE 18% lower than SpaCKLE’s.
Moreover, despite stDiff also being based on DiT, the sum
of our workflow strategies proves to maximize the potential
of the generative model.
In Fig. 5, we present the result of completing simulated
missing values (black dots on the masked map) for two dif-
ferent genes with optimal results for LGDiST. Our method
completes missing data without degrading the general spa-
tial pattern followed by a gene.
Unlike SpaCKLE [18],
LGDiST’s predictions clean the noisy expression map with-
out inducing data sparsity or smoothing. The scatter plots
in Fig. 5 further demonstrate that the data completed with
LGDiST exhibits a distribution closer to the ground-truth
than the data completed with SpaCKLE [18].
On the other hand, Fig. 6 presents examples of subopti-
mal performance from our model. In these cases, LGDiST’s
predictions deviate further from the target values, and, in
some cases, align more closely with the median expression
in the tissue. The compression of LGDiST’s predicted val-
ues toward a narrow expression range in the scatter plot re-
flects this behavior. This tendency is also noticeable in the
predicted expression map of the second row, where the red
spots have a lighter tone than the ground truth and present
an underestimation of the gene expression in that location.
However, despite reducing the range of expression in these
suboptimal results, LGDiST is still capable of preserving
spatial patterns.
To evaluate the robustness of our model, we explore the
completion results with a varied fraction of masked val-
ues that act as synthetically missing data.
Fig.
7 illus-
trates the MSE as a function of the percentage of missing
data for LGDiST and SpaCKLE in the 10XGMBSP data
set. Across all percentages, LGDiST consistently achieves a
lower MSE compared to SpaCKLE, demonstrating its supe-
rior performance in handling incomplete data. SpaCKLE’s
error increases sharply at higher levels of missing data (70%
and 80%), whereas LGDiST maintains a stable and low
MSE even as the task becomes more challenging.
4.3. Gene Prediction Models Enhancement
To further evaluate the significance of our contributions,
we use six models previously proposed in the literature to
tackle the gene expression prediction task [7, 17, 20, 27, 29,
30]. We assess these models’ ability to predict gene expres-
sion profiles from histopathology images when trained on
data whose dropout was completed by either SpaCKLE [18]
or LGDiST. Following [18], during testing, we compute the
evaluation metric (MSE) only on gene expression values
that were directly measured by ST technology, excluding
those that were completed. This ensures that performance
improvements are not artificially influenced by the comple-
tion method itself, but rather reflect a genuine enhancement

===== PAGE 7 =====
ENSG00000188157:
V10F24-015_D1
Masked Map
Ground Truth
LGDiST
MSE = 1.028
SpaCKLE
MSE = 1.566
4
6
8
10
12
14
Ground Truth
4
6
8
10
12
14
Prediction
Ground Truth
LGDiST
SpaCKLE
ENSG00000244617:
V10F24-015_D1
MSE = 1.254
MSE = 0.969
6
8
10
12
14
Ground Truth
6
8
10
12
14
Prediction
Ground Truth
LGDiST
SpaCKLE
2
4
6
8
10
12
4
6
8
10
12
14
Figure 6. Suboptimal qualitative results for data completion with LGDiST vs with SpaCKLE [18].
10
30
50
70
80
% Missing Values
0.52
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.60
0.62
0.64
Completion MSE
LGDiST
SpaCKLE
Figure 7. Line plot displaying completion MSE for LGDiST and
SpaCKLE [18] methods across different percentages of syntheti-
cally masked data.
in the models’ predictive capabilities.
Fig.
8 compares the (a) MSE and (b) PCC, of gene
expression prediction models when trained with LGDiST
and SpaCKLE [18].
The left Y-axis displays the num-
ber of datasets in which each prediction method improved,
while the right Y-axis indicates the improvement percent-
age in the corresponding evaluation metric when training on
LGDiST-completed data versus SpaCKLE-completed data
[18]. These results indicate that all models achieve better
gene expression prediction in more than half of the datasets
when trained on LGDiST-completed data.
Additionally,
all six models exhibit an average improvement in MSE
and PCC, confirming the benefit of training on dropout-
corrected data using LGDiST.
The reduction in MSE indicates that the predicted gene
expression values are more accurate and closer to the true
expression levels when trained on LGDiST completed data.
Notably, BLEEP demonstrates the greatest improvement,
achieving an average MSE reduction of 10%. Furthermore,
the improvement in PCC reflects a stronger preservation
of spatial patterns in the predicted gene expression values.
This is crucial in spatial transcriptomics, as it ensures that
spatial relationships between gene expressions across tissue
regions are better captured. SEPAL, in particular, demon-
strates the highest PCC improvement with a 188% increase,
highlighting its ability to better align spatial gene expres-
sion patterns when training on LGDiST-completed data.
4.4. Ablation Experiments
To better understand the effectiveness of our proposed
method, we conduct ablation experiments using a random
selection of six datasets from SpaRED. First, we evaluate
the impact of removing context genes from our input data,
meaning that we rely solely on the HSAGs in their latent
representation. Then, we explore working without the au-
toencoder component, directly training the diffusion branch
on gene expression values.
Table 1 presents the results of the ablation experiments,
demonstrating a 23% decline in average performance when
neighborhoods contain only the HSAGs instead of using a
latent space that includes context genes. Removing also the
autoencoder component and working directly on gene ex-
pression values leads to a 62% increase in completion error

===== PAGE 8 =====
a.
b.
Figure 8. (a) MSE and (b) PCC of gene-expression prediction models when trained on LGDiST-completed data compared to training on
data completed with SpaCKLE [18].
Table 1. Average MSE in ablation experiments.
Latent space
Context genes
Average MSE
✓
✓
0.573 ± 0.136
✓
0.710 ± 0.214
1.007 ± 0.200
Table 2.
Average MSE with varying number of neighbors for
LGDiST. We present the number of floating point operations
(FLOPs) of each neighborhood configuration.
Neighbors
Average MSE
FLOPs (G)
0
1.891 ± 0.988
0.64
6
0.573 ± 0.136
3.22
18
0.588 ± 0.155
8.74
compared to removing only the context genes.
As a final ablation experiment, we evaluate the complete
LGDiST model (including both the autoencoder and con-
text genes) under three neighborhood size configurations.
Our default setup uses six neighbors, equivalent to 1-hop in
the hexagonal geometry of Visium. We also examine the
effects of removing neighborhood conditioning altogether,
as well as expanding the neighborhood to 18 neighbors (2-
hops). The results in Table 2 underscore the importance of
neighboring spots for accurate predictions, considering that
removing neighborhood information increases the MSE by
230%. Although expanding to a 2-hop neighborhood yields
similar performance to 1-hop, it increases the number of
FLOPs by 171%, resulting in a substantially higher compu-
tational cost without performance improvement.
These findings indicate that including known data from
neighboring spots successfully guides the completion pro-
cess and that latent representations provide biologically
meaningful information for data completion.
Similarly,
context genes prove to be valuable for certain ST analy-
ses, despite having a low spatial autocorrelation.
While
LGDiST is computationally expensive by design, with a dif-
fusion model backbone that requires 3.22 GFLOPs, restrict-
ing the neighborhood to 1-hop achieves strong performance
without substantially increasing the computational cost.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, we present LGDiST, a reference-free ST com-
pletion model that effectively addresses the challenges of
tackling data dropout. We show the suitability of gener-
ative models combined with AEs to predict missing val-
ues in ST and propose a novel approach to harness the
contextual information available in low spatially autocor-
related genes. Our results prove that LGDiST outperforms
the previous state-of-the-art with an average MSE reduction
of 18% across the SpaRED database. Finally, we demon-
strate that completing ST data with LGDiST improves its
reliability and unlocks the full potential of this sequencing
technology. By improving the performance of gene expres-
sion prediction models when training them on LGDiST-
completed data, we highlight its broader impact on advanc-
ing histopathology image analysis and related biomedical
research.
6. Acknowledgments
Daniela Vega acknowledges the support of a UniAn-
des
Google-DeepMind
2024
scholarship.
This
work
was
supported
by
Azure
sponsorship
cred-
its
granted
by
Microsoft’s
AI
for
Good
Research
Lab.
References
[1] Tamim Abdelaal, Soufiane Mourragui, Ahmed Mahfouz, and
Marcel JT Reinders. Spage: spatial gene enhancement using

===== PAGE 9 =====
scrna-seq. Nucleic acids research, 48(18):e107–e107, 2020.
1, 2
[2] Kamal Berahmand,
Fatemeh Daneshfar,
Elaheh Sadat
Salehi, Yuefeng Li, and Yue Xu.
Autoencoders and their
applications in machine learning: a survey. Artificial Intelli-
gence Review, 57(2):28, 2024. 2
[3] Tommaso Biancalani, Gabriele Scalia, Lorenzo Buffoni,
Raghav Avasthi, Ziqing Lu, Aman Sanger, Neriman Tokcan,
Charles R Vanderburg, ˚Asa Segerstolpe, Meng Zhang, et al.
Deep learning and alignment of spatially resolved single-cell
transcriptomes with tangram. Nature methods, 18(11):1352–
1362, 2021. 1
[4] Mengnan Cheng, Yujia Jiang, Jiangshan Xu, Alexios-
Fotios A Mentis, Shuai Wang, Huiwen Zheng, Sunil Kumar
Sahu, Longqi Liu, and Xun Xu. Spatially resolved transcrip-
tomics: a comprehensive review of their technological ad-
vances, applications, and challenges.
Journal of Genetics
and Genomics, 50(9):625–640, 2023. 1
[5] Thomas Defard, Hugo Laporte, Mallick Ayan, Juliette
Soulier, Sandra Curras-Alonso, Christian Weber, Florian
Massip, Jos´e-Arturo Londo˜no-Vallejo, Charles Fouillade,
Florian Mueller, et al. A point cloud segmentation frame-
work for image-based spatial transcriptomics. Communica-
tions Biology, 7(1):823, 2024. 1
[6] Ashraful Haque, Jessica Engel, Sarah A Teichmann, and
Tapio L¨onnberg.
A practical guide to single-cell rna-
sequencing for biomedical research and clinical applications.
Genome medicine, 9:1–12, 2017. 1
[7] Bryan
He,
Ludvig
Bergenstr˚ahle,
Linnea
Stenbeck,
Abubakar Abid,
Alma Andersson,
˚Ake Borg,
Jonas
Maaskola, Joakim Lundeberg, and James Zou. Integrating
spatial gene expression and breast tumour morphology
via deep learning.
Nature biomedical engineering, 4(8):
827–834, 2020. 1, 6
[8] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising dif-
fusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020. 2
[9] Yang Jin, Yuanli Zuo, Gang Li, Wenrong Liu, Yitong Pan,
Ting Fan, Xin Fu, Xiaojun Yao, and Yong Peng. Advances
in spatial transcriptomics and its applications in cancer re-
search. Molecular Cancer, 23(1):129, 2024. 1
[10] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014. 5
[11] Daisuke Komura, Mieko Ochi, and Shumpei Ishikawa. Ma-
chine learning methods for histopathological image analysis:
Updates in 2024. Computational and Structural Biotechnol-
ogy Journal, 2024. 1
[12] Kongming Li, Jiahao Li, Yuhao Tao, and Fei Wang. stdiff: a
diffusion model for imputing spatial transcriptomics through
single-cell transcriptomics. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 25
(3):bbae171, 2024. 1, 2, 5, 6
[13] Yijun Li, Stefan Stanojevic, and Lana X Garmire. Emerging
artificial intelligence applications in spatial transcriptomics
analysis. Computational and Structural Biotechnology Jour-
nal, 20:2895–2908, 2022. 1
[14] Erpai Luo, Minsheng Hao, Lei Wei, and Xuegong Zhang.
scdiffusion: conditional generation of high-quality single-
cell data using diffusion model.
Bioinformatics, 40(9):
btae518, 2024. 1
[15] Ricfrid van der Marel. Navigating the complexity of data
imputation in spatial transcriptomics: Strategies, challenges,
and future directions. 2024. 3
[16] Vivien Marx. Method of the year: spatially resolved tran-
scriptomics. Nature methods, 18(1):9–14, 2021. 1
[17] Gabriel Mejia, Paula C´ardenas, Daniela Ruiz, Angela
Castillo, and Pablo Arbel´aez. Sepal: Spatial gene expres-
sion prediction from local graphs.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV) Workshops, pages 2294–2303, 2023. 3, 5, 6
[18] Gabriel Mejia, Daniela Ruiz, Paula C´ardenas, Leonardo
Manrique, Daniela Vega, and Pablo Arbel´aez.
Enhancing
gene expression prediction from histology images with spa-
tial transcriptomics completion. In International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-
vention, pages 91–101. Springer, 2024. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
[19] Patrick AP Moran. Notes on continuous stochastic phenom-
ena. Biometrika, 37(1/2):17–23, 1950. 3
[20] Minxing Pang, Kenong Su, and Mingyao Li.
Leverag-
ing information in spatial transcriptomics to predict super-
resolution gene expression from histology images in tumors.
BioRxiv, pages 2021–11, 2021. 6
[21] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models
with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-
national conference on computer vision, pages 4195–4205,
2023. 2
[22] Duy Pham, Xiao Tan, Jun Xu, Laura F Grice, Pui Yeng Lam,
Arti Raghubar, Jana Vukovic, Marc J Ruitenberg, and Quan
Nguyen. stlearn: integrating spatial location, tissue morphol-
ogy and gene expression to find cell types, cell-cell inter-
actions and spatial trajectories within undissociated tissues.
biorxiv, pages 2020–05, 2020. 3
[23] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 4
[24] Chen Shengquan, Zhang Boheng, Chen Xiaoyang, Zhang
Xuegong, and Jiang Rui. stplus: a reference-based method
for the accurate enhancement of spatial transcriptomics.
Bioinformatics, 37(Supplement 1):i299–i307, 2021. 1, 2
[25] Farzan Soleymani, Eric Paquet, Herna Lydia Viktor, and
Wojtek Michalowski.
Structure-based protein and small
molecule generation using egnn and diffusion models:
A comprehensive review.
Computational and Structural
Biotechnology Journal, 2024. 2
[26] Ye Wang, Bin Liu, Gexin Zhao, YooJin Lee, Anton Buzdin,
Xiaofeng Mu, Joseph Zhao, Hong Chen, and Xinmin Li.
Spatial transcriptomics: Technologies, applications and ex-
perimental considerations. Genomics, 115(5):110671, 2023.
1
[27] Ronald Xie, Kuan Pang, Sai Chung, Catia Perciani, Sonya
MacParland, Bo Wang, and Gary Bader. Spatially resolved

===== PAGE 10 =====
gene expression prediction from histology images via bi-
modal contrastive learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:70626–70637, 2023. 1, 6
[28] Chaorui Yan, Yanxu Zhu, Miao Chen, Kainan Yang, Feifei
Cui, Quan Zou, and Zilong Zhang.
Integration tools for
scrna-seq data and spatial transcriptomics sequencing data.
Briefings in Functional Genomics, 23(4):295–302, 2024. 3
[29] Yan Yang, Md Zakir Hossain, Eric A Stone, and Shafin Rah-
man. Exemplar guided deep neural network for spatial tran-
scriptomics analysis of gene expression prediction. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applica-
tions of Computer Vision, pages 5039–5048, 2023. 1, 6
[30] Yan Yang, Md Zakir Hossain, Eric Stone, and Shafin Rah-
man. Spatial transcriptomics analysis of gene expression pre-
diction using exemplar guided graph neural network. Pattern
Recognition, 145:109966, 2024. 1, 6
[31] Sichen Zhu, Yuchen Zhu, Molei Tao, and Peng Qiu. Dif-
fusion generative modeling for spatially resolved gene ex-
pression inference from histology images.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.15598, 2025. 2
