
===== PAGE 1 =====
1
ChatCAD+: Towards a Universal and Reliable
Interactive CAD using LLMs
Zihao Zhao, Sheng Wang, Jinchen Gu, Yitao Zhu,
Lanzhuju Mei, Zixu Zhuang, Zhiming Cui, Qian Wang, Dinggang Shen, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— The integration of Computer-Aided Diagnosis
(CAD) with Large Language Models (LLMs) presents a
promising frontier in clinical applications, notably in au-
tomating diagnostic processes akin to those performed by
radiologists and providing consultations similar to a virtual
family doctor. Despite the promising potential of this inte-
gration, current works face at least two limitations: (1) From
the perspective of a radiologist, existing studies typically
have a restricted scope of applicable imaging domains,
failing to meet the diagnostic needs of different patients.
Also, the insufficient diagnostic capability of LLMs further
undermine the quality and reliability of the generated med-
ical reports. (2) Current LLMs lack the requisite depth in
medical expertise, rendering them less effective as virtual
family doctors due to the potential unreliability of the advice
provided during patient consultations. To address these
limitations, we introduce ChatCAD+, to be universal and
reliable. Specifically, it is featured by two main modules:
(1) Reliable Report Generation and (2) Reliable Interaction.
The Reliable Report Generation module is capable of inter-
preting medical images from diverse domains and generate
high-quality medical reports via our proposed hierarchical
in-context learning. Concurrently, the interaction module
leverages up-to-date information from reputable medical
websites to provide reliable medical advice. Together, these
designed modules synergize to closely align with the ex-
pertise of human medical professionals, offering enhanced
consistency and reliability for interpretation and advice.
The source code is available at GitHub.
Index Terms— Large Language Models, Multi-modality
System, Medical Dialogue, Computer-Assisted Diagnosis
I. INTRODUCTION
Zihao Zhao, Sheng Wang, Jinchen Gu and Yitao Zhu contributed
equally and are listed as first authors.
Corresponding authors: Qian Wang and Dinggang Shen.
Zihao Zhao, Jinchen Gu, Yitao Zhu, Lanzhuju Mei, and Zhiming
Cui are with the School of Biomedical Engineering, ShanghaiTech
University, Shanghai 201210, China (email: zihaozhao10@gmail.com,
{gujch12022,zhuyt, meilzhj, cuizm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn)
Sheng Wang and Zixu Zhuang are with the School of Biomedical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China,
Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200230,
China, and also ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. (e-
mail: {wsheng, zixuzhuang}@sjtu.edu.cn)
Qian Wang and Dinggang Shen are with the School of Biomedical
Engineering & State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materi-
als and Devices, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China,
and Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center, Shanghai 201210,
China. Dinggang Shen is also with Shanghai United Imaging In-
telligence Co. Ltd., Shanghai 200230, China. (e-mail: {qianwang,
dgshen}@shanghaitech.edu.cn)
Q: Moderate but atelectasis? Is it ok?
LLM: Atelectasis often has
no symptoms unless … it
does not necessarily mean
that
you
are
in
trouble.
However, it is always a good
idea to consult with a doctor
for further evaluation.
[References] 
Merch Manual Atelectasis
Knowledge Database
(a) Reliable Report Generation 
(b) Reliable Interaction
Report Database
Large
Language
Model
(e.g.,
ChatGPT)
LLM: Moderate 
cardiomegaly 
with atelectasis. 
No new opacities
are found…
REPORTS 
⇒
⇒
Large
Language
Model
(e.g.,
ChatGPT)
⇒
⇒
Fig. 1.
Overview of our proposed ChatCAD+ system. (a) For pa-
tients seeking a diagnosis, ChatCAD+ generates reliable medical re-
ports based on the input medical image(s) by referring to local report
database. (b) Additionally, for any inquiry from patients, ChatCAD+ re-
trieves related knowledge from online database and lets large language
model generate reliable response.
L
ARGE Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as
promising tools in various domains. It refers to advanced
artificial intelligence that has been extensively trained on text
data. Drawing on the combined power of sophisticated deep
learning techniques, large-scale datasets, and increased model
sizes, LLMs demonstrate extraordinary capabilities in under-
standing and generating human-like text. This is substantiated
by significant projects like ChatGPT [1] and LLaMA [2].
These techniques are highly suitable for a wide range of
scenarios, such as customer service, marketing, education, and
healthcare consultation. Notably, ChatGPT has passed part of
the US medical licensing exams, highlighting the potential of
LLMs in the medical domain [3], [4].
So far, several studies have been conducted to integrate
LLMs into Computer-Assisted Diagnosis (CAD) systems of
medical images. Conventional CAD typically operates fol-
lowing pure computer vision [5], [6] or vision-language
paradigms [7], [8]. LLMs have shown ability to effectively
interpret findings from medical images, thus mitigating lim-
itations of only visual interpretation. For example, in our
arXiv:2305.15964v5  [cs.CV]  17 Apr 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
pilot study, we leverage the intermediate results obtained from
image CAD networks and then utilize LLMs to generate final
diagnostic reports [9].
Although some efforts have been made to combine CAD
networks and LLMs [9]–[11], it should be noted that these
studies are limited in their scopes, which often focus on spe-
cific image domains. That is, such a system may only support
a single image modality, organ, or application (such as chest
X-ray), which greatly limits generalizability in the real clinical
workflow. The primary reason for this limitation comes from
notable topologic and semantic variations observed among
medical image data, which present distinct challenges when
attempting to encode various images with a unified model.
Furthermore, although LLMs have demonstrated the capability
to articulate medical concepts and clinical interpretations [12],
[13], there still exists a significant gap between LLMs and
radiologists. This gap undoubtedly undermines patient confi-
dence in a LLM-generated report. Consequently, these issues
hinder practical utilization of LLMs in automated generation
of medical reports. In addition, it is also articulable that the
integration of LLMs and CADs may lead to medical dialogue
systems [14]–[16]. In this way, patients will be able to interact
through LLMs and acquire more medical advice and explana-
tion, while this functionality is often missing in conventional
CAD systems. However, existing studies show that the general
LLMs typically produce medical advice based solely on their
encoded knowledge, without considering specific knowledge
in the medical domain [15]. As a result, patients may receive
unreliable responses, dwarfing trust in CADs and thereby
hindering the use of such systems in real medical scenarios.
In order to tackle the challenges mentioned above, we pro-
pose ChatCAD+ in this paper. And our contributions are made
in the following aspects. (1) Universal image interpretation.
Due to the difficulty in obtaining a unified CAD network
tackling various images currently, ChatCAD+ incorporates a
domain identification module to work with a variety of CAD
models (c.f. Fig. 2(a)). ChatCAD+ can adaptively select a
corresponding model given the input medical image. The
tentative output of the CAD network is converted into text
description to reflect image features, making it applicable
for diagnostic reporting subsequently.
(2) Hierarchical in-
context learning for enhanced report generation.
Top-k
reports that are semantically similar to the LLM-generated
report are retrieved from a clinic database via the proposed
retrieval module (c.f. Fig. 3. The retrieved k reports then serve
as in-context examples to refine the LLM-generated report.
(3) Knowledge-based reliable interaction. As illustrated in
Fig. 1(b), ChatCAD+ does not directly provide medical advice.
Instead, it first seeks help via our proposed knowledge retrieval
module for obtaining relevant knowledge from professional
sources, e.g. Merck Manuals, Mayo Clinic, and Cleveland
Clinic. Then, the LLM considers the retrieved knowledge as
a reference to provide reliable medical advice.
In summary, our ChatCAD+ for the first time builds a
universal and reliable medical dialogue system. The improved
quality of answers and diagnostic reports of the chatbot reveals
potential of LLMs in interactive medical consultation.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Large Language Models in Healthcare
Following the impressive potential demonstrated by Chat-
GPT with its 100B-scale parameters, researchers have fur-
ther expanded the application of language models in health-
care unprecedentedly, yielding highly promising results. Med-
PaLM [17] was developed using meticulously curated biomed-
ical corpora and human feedback, showcasing its potential
with notable achievements, including a remarkable 67.6%
accuracy on the MedQA exam. Notably, ChatGPT, which did
not receive specific medical training, successfully passed all
three parts of the USMLE and achieved an overall accuracy of
over 50% across all exams, with several exams surpassing 60%
accuracy [18]. ChatDoctor [14], fine-tuned on the LLaMA
model using synthetic clinical QA data generated by Chat-
GPT, also incorporated medical domain knowledge to provide
reliable responses. However, our ChatCAD+ distinguishes its
reliable interaction from ChatDoctor in several aspects. First,
ChatDoctor relies on Wikipedia, which is editable for all users
and may compromise the rigor and reliability required in
the medical domain. Second, ChatDoctor simply divides the
knowledge of each medical topic into equal sections and relies
on rule-based ranking to select relevant information. In con-
trast, our reliable interaction leverages the Merck Manual [19],
a comprehensive and trusted medical knowledge resource. It
can organize medical knowledge into a hierarchical structure,
thus enabling us to fully exploit the reasoning capabilities
of the LLM in recursively retrieving the most pertinent and
valuable knowledge.
B. Multi-modality Large Models
In present times, multi-modality large models are typically
constructed based on pre-trained models rather than training
them from scratch. Frozen [20] performed fine-tuning on
an image encoder, utilizing its outputs as soft prompts for
the language model. Flamingo [21] introduced cross-attention
layers into the LLM to incorporate visual features, exclusively
pre-training these new layers. BLIP-2 [22] leveraged both
frozen image encoders and frozen LLMs, connecting them
through their proposed Q-Former. Following the architecture
of BLIP-2, XrayGPT [23] was specifically developed on chest
X-ray. While the training cost for XrayGPT is demanding,
our proposed ChatCAD+ can seamlessly integrate existing pre-
trained CAD models without requiring further training. This
highlights the inherent advantage of ChatCAD+ in continual
learning scenarios, where additional CAD models can be
effortlessly incorporated.
In more recent studies, researchers have taken a different ap-
proach, i.e., designing prompts to allow LLMs to utilize vision
models for avoiding training altogether. For instance, Visual-
ChatGPT [24] established a connection between ChatGPT and
a series of visual foundation models, enabling exchange of
images during conversations. ChatCAD [9] linked existing
CAD models with LLMs to enhance diagnostic accuracy
and improve patient care. Following a similar paradigm as
ChatCAD [9], Visual Med-Alpaca [25] incorporated multiple
vision models to generate text descriptions for medical images.

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
Visual Description
C
Model-1’s diagnosis prediction: 
Pneumonia.
... 
Model-N’s results: "...airspace 
consolidation is noted within the 
left lower lobe..."
Please generate the report based 
on these networks’ results.
Prob2text
(a) Universal Interpretation
(b) Hierarchical In-context Learning 
"...
have been provided 
and show that the 
left lower lobe to be 
infected, consistent 
with a diagnosis of 
pneumonia
..."
Preliminary Report
Top-K Report
Composite
Enhanced Report
"... 
there is airspace 
consolidation in the left 
lower lobe, which is 
concerning for pneumonia. 
However, there is no 
evidence of large effusion 
or pneumothorax
..."
Retrieval 
Module
Large
Language
Model
(e.g.,
ChatGPT)
Large
Language
Model
(e.g.,
ChatGPT)
"... 
Ill-defined opacity is 
noted within the  
left lower lobe 
which is likely 
atelectasis given the 
volume loss
..."
Domain 
Identification 
Chest CADs
Tooth CADs
Knee CADs
✔
“Chest X-ray”
“Dental X-ray”
“Knee MRI”
CLIP
Image 
Encoder
CLIP
Text 
Encoder
I
M1
M2
M3
“Chest X-ray”
Domain 
Identification 
#Input
#Output
Visual Description
Model-1’s diagnosis prediction: 
Pneumonia.
... 
Model-N’s results: "...airspace 
consolidation is noted within the 
left lower lobe..."
Please generate the report based 
on these networks’ results.
Trainable
Frozen
Fig. 2.
Overview of the reliable report generation. (a) Universal interpretation: To enhance the vision capability of LLMs, multiple CAD models
are incorporated. The numerical results obtained from these models are transformed into visual descriptions following the rule of prob2text. (b)
Hierarchical in-context learning: The LLM initially generates a preliminary report based on the visual description, which is then enhanced through
in-context learning using retrieved semantically similar reports. LLM and CLIP models are kept frozen, while CAD models are denoted as trainable
as they can be continually trained and updated without interfering with other components.
However, when compared to our study, it is limited to a single
medical imaging domain and also lacks reliability in both
report generation and interactive question answering.
III. METHOD
The proposed ChatCAD+ is a multi-modality system capa-
ble of processing both image and text inputs (as illustrated in
Fig. 1) through reliable report generation and reliable interac-
tion, respectively. It is important to note that, in this paper,
the term “modality” refers to language and image, which
differs from the commonly used concept of medical image
modality. The reliable report generation treats medical image
as input, identifies its domain, and provides enhanced medical
reports by referencing a local report database. Simultaneously,
for the user’s text query, the reliable interaction will retrieve
clinically-sound knowledge from a professional knowledge
database, thereby serving as a reliable reference for the LLM
(e.g. ChatGPT) to enhance the reliability its response.
A. Reliable Report Generation
This section outlines our proposed reliable report genera-
tion, as depicted in Fig. 2, which encompasses two primary
stages: universal interpretation and hierarchical in-context gen-
eration. Section III-A.1 illustrates the paradigm to interpret
medical images from diverse domains into descriptions that
can be understood by LLMs. The resulting visual description
then serves as the input for subsequent hierarchical in-context
learning. Following this, Section III-A.2 elucidates hierarchical
in-context learning, within which the retrieval module (in
Fig. 3) acts as key component.
TABLE I
THE ILLUSTRATION OF PROB2TEXT. P3 IS THE DEFAULT SETTING.
CAD Model→(disease: prob)
P1 (direct)
“{disease} score: {prob}”
P2 (simplistic)
prob∈[0, 0.5): “No Finding”
prob∈[0.5, 1]: “The prediction is {disease}”
P3 (illustrative)
prob∈[0, 0.2): “No sign of {disease}”
prob∈[0.2, 0.5): “Small possibility of {disease}”
prob∈[0.5, 0.9): “Patient is likely to have {disease}”
prob∈[0.9, 1]: “Definitely have {disease}”
1) Universal Interpretation: The process of universal inter-
pretation can be divided into three steps. Initially, the proposed
domain identification module is employed to determine the
specific domain of the medical image. Subsequently, the
corresponding domain-specific model is activated to interpret
the image. Finally, the interpretation result is converted into
a text prompt for describing visual information via the rule-
based prob2text module for further processing.
Domain identification chooses CAD models to interpret the
input medical image, which is fundamental for subsequent
operations of ChatCAD+. To achieve this, we employ a
method of visual-language contrast that computes the cosine
similarity between the input image and textual representations
of various potential domains. This approach takes advantage
of language’s ability in densely describing the features of a
particular type of image, as well as its ease of extensibility. In
particular, we employ the pre-trained BiomedCLIP model [26]
to encode both the medical image and the text associated
with domains of interest. In this study, we demonstrate upon

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
Local
Database
Modeling
TF-IDF 
Embedding
Building (offline)
Querying (online)
Query
Report
TF-IDF 
Embedding
Spherical Projection 
KD-Tree Engine
Input
Data Store
Top-K
Reports
Output
Term
Extraction 
Space 
Partition
KD-Tree
Searching 
Data
Points
Query
Point
Edema 0.636
Lung 0.563
...
Pleural 0.192
Edema 0.852
Lung 0.392
...
Pleural 0
Term
Extraction 
Inference
Fig. 3. The illustration of the retrieval module within reliable report
generation. It adopts the TF-IDF algorithm to preserve the semantics
of each report and converts it into a latent embedding during offline
modeling and online inference. To facilitate highly efficient retrieval, we
perform spherical projection on all TF-IDF embeddings, whether during
building or querying. In this manner, we can utilize the KD-Tree structure
to store these data and implement retrieval with a low time complexity.
three domains: chest X-ray, dental X-ray, and knee MRI. The
workflow is depicted in the upper right portion of Fig. 2.
Assuming there are three domains D1, D2, D3, along with
their textual representations M1, M2, M3, and also a visual
representation denoted as I for the input image, we define
Dpred = argmaxi∈{1,2,3}
I Mi
∥I∥∥Mi∥,
(1)
where Dpred denotes the prediction of the medical image
domain. The module thereby can call the domain-specific CAD
model to analyze visual information given Dpred.
Since most CAD models generate outputs that can hardly be
understood by language models, further processing is needed
to bridge this gap. For example, an image diagnosis model
typically outputs tensors representing the likelihood of certain
clinical findings. To establish a link between image and text,
these tensors are transformed into textual descriptions accord-
ing to diagnostic-related rules, which is denoted as prob2text in
Fig. 2(a). The prob2text module has been designed to present
clinically relevant information in a manner that is more easily
interpretable by LLMs. The details of the prompt design are
illustrated in Table I. Using chest X-ray as an example, we
follow the three types (P1-P3) of prompt designs in [9] and
adopt P3 (illustrative) as the recommended setting in this
study. Concretely, it employs a grading system that maps
the numerical scores into clinically illustrative description of
disease severity. The scores are divided into four levels based
on their magnitude: “No sign”, “Small possibility”, “Likely”,
and “Definitely”. The corresponding texts are then used to
describe the likelihood of different observations in chest X-ray,
providing a concise and informative summary of the patient’s
condition. The prompt design for dental X-ray and knee MRI
are in similar ways. And other prompt designs, such as P1 and
P2 [9], will be discussed in experiments below.
2) Hierarchical In-context Learning: The proposed strategy
for hierarchical in-context learning, as shown in Fig. 2(b),
consists of (1) preliminary report generation and (2) retrieval-
based in-context enhancement.
In the first step, the LLM utilizes the visual description
to generate a preliminary diagnostic report. This process is
facilitated through prompts such as “Write a report based
on results from Network(s).” It is important to note that
the generation of this preliminary report relies solely on the
capability of the LLM and is still far from matching capability
of human specialists. As a result, even powerful LLMs like
ChatGPT still struggle to achieve satisfactory results.
To address this concern, the next step involves retrieving the
top-k reports that share similar semantics with the preliminary
report as in-context examples. The retrieval module is designed
to preserve semantic information and ensure efficient imple-
mentation. Specifically, we employ TF-IDF [27] to model the
semantics of each report, and the KD-Tree [28] data structure
is utilized to facilitate high-speed retrieval. Fig. 3 illustrates
the detailed pipeline of the proposed retrieval module. For
simplification, we use chest X-ray in MIMIC-CXR as an
example in this section. To better preserve disease-related
information in the report, we focus on 17 medical terms
related to thoracic diseases during the modeling of TF-IDF
embeddings, which form a term set T . Assuming the training
set of MIMIC-CXR as D, the TF-IDF score for each term
t ∈T in each document d ∈D is computed as:
TF-IDF(t, d) = TF(t, d) · IDF(t)
= |{w ∈d : w = t}|
|d|
· log
|D|
|{d ∈D : t ∈d}|,
(2)
where w indicates a word within the document d. In brief,
TF(t, d) represents the frequency of term t occurring in d, and
IDF(t) denotes the inverse of the frequency that document d
occurs in the training set D. Following this, we define the
TF-IDF embedding (TIE) of a document d as:
TIE(d) = {TF-IDF(t, d)|t ∈T }.
(3)
After calculating the TIEs for all d ∈D, we organize
them using the KD-Tree [28] data structure, which enables
fast online querying. The KD-Tree is a space-partitioning data
structure that can implement k-nearest-neighbor querying in
O(log(n)) time on average, making it suitable for information
searching. However, since the implementation of KD-Tree
relies on L2 distance instead of cosine similarity, it cannot be
directly applied to our TIEs. To address this issue, we project
all TIEs onto the surface of a unit hypersphere, as shown in
the right panel of Fig. 3. After spherical projection, we have:
L2( ⃗q
|⃗q|, ⃗v
|⃗v|) = 2r · sin(θ
2),
(4)
where ⃗q and ⃗v represent the TIE of the query report and
a selected report, respectively. r indicates the radius of the
hypersphere (radius=1 in this study), and θ ∈[0, π] stands for
the angle between
⃗q
|⃗q| and
⃗v
|⃗v|. The L2 distance between two
TIEs will monotonically increase as a function of the angle
between them, which favors the application of the KD-Tree
data structure for efficient retrieval.
During online querying, the KD-Tree engine retrieves the
top-k (i.e., k=3) reports that share the most similar semantics
with the query report (i.e., preliminary report illustrated in
Fig. 2). It then asks the LLM to refine its preliminary report
with the retrieved k reports as references, and generate the
enhanced report as the final output.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
Unstable 
Angina
abstract
…
treatment
abstract
prehospital 
care
…
drug 
treatment
prognosis
medical topic
section
subsection
…
Angina
Pectoris 
MERCK MANUALS 
DATABASE
Tree-like 
dictionary
…
(a) Structured Knowledge Database
(b) LLM-based Backtracking Retrieval
(c) Knowledge-referenced Answering
[#Question]
Large
Language
Model
Tree-like 
dictionary
Backtracking
Retrieval
⇒
[#Knowledge]
⇒
[#Prompt]
Please refer to the 
following knowledge to 
answer “[#Question]”
and provide an analysis: 
“[#Knowledge]”
Fig. 4.
Overview of the reliable interaction. (a) The illustration of structured medical knowledge database, organized as a tree-like dictionary, where
each medical topic has multiple sections while sections can be further divided into subsections. (b) A LLM-based knowledge retrieval method is
proposed to search relevant knowledge in a backtrack manner. (c) The LLM is prompted to answer the question based on the retrieved knowledge.
B. Reliable Interaction
This section outlines the reliable interaction, which is re-
sponsible for answering the user’s text query. It serves a dual
role within our proposed ChatCAD+. First, reliable interac-
tion can function as a sequential module of reliable report
generation to enhance interpretability and understandability
of medical reports for patients. In this capacity, it takes the
generated report from previous module as the input, and
provides patients with explanations of involved clinical terms1.
Second, it can also operate independently to answer clinical-
related questions and provide reliable medical advice.
The proposed ChatCAD+ offers reliable interaction via
the construction of a professional knowledge database and
LLM-based knowledge retrieval. In this study, we demonstrate
using the Merck Manuals. The Merck Manuals are a series
of healthcare reference books that provide evidence-based
information on the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
medical conditions.
The implementation of LLM-based knowledge retrieval
leverages the Chain-of-Thought (CoT) technique, which is
widely known for its ability to enhance the performance of
LLM in problem-solving. CoT breaks down a problem into
a series of sub-problems and then synthesizes the answers
to these sub-problems progressively for solving the original
problem. Humans typically do not read the entire knowledge
base but rather skim through topic titles to find what they
are looking for. Inspired by this, we have designed a prompt
system that automatically guides the LLM to execute such
searches. Correspondingly, we have structured the Merck
Manuals database as a hierarchical dictionary, with topic titles
of different levels serving as keys, as shown in Fig 4(a).
Fig. 4(b) demonstrates the proposed knowledge retrieval meth-
1Clinical terms within a radiology report can be automatically extracted via
tools like RadGraph [29].
ods. Initially, we provide the LLM with only titles of five
related medical topics in the database, and then ask the LLM
to select the most relevant topic to begin the retrieval. Once
the LLM has made its choice, we provide it with the content
of “abstract” section and present names of all other sections
subject to this topic. Given that medical topics often exhibit
hierarchical organization across three or four tiers, we repeat
this process iteratively, empowering the LLM to efficiently
navigate through all tiers of a given medical topic. Upon
identifying relevant medical knowledge, the LLM is prompted
to return the retrieved knowledge, terminating the process.
Otherwise, in the case that the LLM finds none of the provided
information as relevant, our algorithm would backtrack to the
parent tier, which makes it a kind of depth-first search [30].
Finally, the LLM is prompted to provide reliable response
based on the retrieved knowledge (in Fig. 4(c)).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To comprehensively assess our proposed ChatCAD+, we
conducted evaluations across three crucial aspects that influ-
ence its effectiveness in real-world scenarios: (1) the capability
to handle medical images from different domains, (2) report
generation quality, and (3) the efficacy in clinical question
answering. This section commences with an introduction to
the datasets used and implementation details of ChatCAD+.
Then, we delve into the evaluation of these aspects in turn.
A. Dataset and implementations
Domain identification: To investigate the robustness of
domain identification, which is the fundamental component
of our proposed universal CAD system, we crafted a dataset
covering nine medical imaging domains by randomly selecting
samples from different datasets. The statistics of this dataset

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
TABLE II
STATISTICS OF THE COMPOSED DATASET FOR THE EVALUATION OF DOMAIN IDENTIFICATION.
chest X-ray
dental X-ray
knee X-ray
mammography
chest CT
fundus
endoscopy
dermoscopy
blood cell
number
400
360
800
360
320
120
200
360
200
source
MedFMC [31]
Tufts Dental [32]
OAI [33]
INbreast [34]
COVID-CT [35]
DIARETDB1 [36]
MedFMC [31]
ISIC2016 [37]
PBC [38]
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
# Number of domains
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
ACC(%)
CLIP
BiomedCLIP
PMC-CLIP
CLIP
BiomedCLIP
PMC-CLIP
Fig. 5. Evaluation of domain identification using different CLIPs.
are presented in Table II. During the evaluation, we progres-
sively increase the number of domains following the left-to-
right order in Table II and report the accuracy (ACC) in each
step. Since the pre-trained CLIP model is utilized to perform
domain identification (as shown in Fig. 2), we also investigated
the impact of different CLIPs in Sec. IV-B.
Report generation: For a fair comparison, the report gen-
eration performance of ChatCAD+ is assessed on the public
MIMIC-CXR dataset [39]. The MIMIC-CXR is a large public
dataset of chest X-ray images, associated radiology reports,
and other clinical data. The dataset consists of 377,110 de-
identified chest X-ray images and associated 227,827 radiol-
ogy reports. The MIMIC-CXR dataset allows us to measure
the quality of diagnostic accuracy and report generation, as
most report generation methods are designed specifically for
chest X-ray. The quality of report generation was tested on
the official test set of the MIMIC-CXR dataset, focusing on
five findings (cardiomegaly, edema, consolidation, atelectasis,
and pleural effusion). Since ChatGPT was adopted as the
default LLM in report generation experiments, we randomly
selected 200 samples for each finding of interest due to
limitations on the per-hour accesses of OpenAI API-Key,
resulting in a total of 1,000 test samples. To evaluate the
performance of report generation, we used several widely-
used Natural Language Generation (NLG) metrics, including
BLEU [40], METEOR [41], and ROUGE-L [42]. Specifically,
BLEU measures the similarity between generated and ground-
truth reports by counting word overlap and we denote Corpus
BLEU as C-BLEU by default. METEOR considers synonym
substitution and evaluates performance on both sentence level
and report level. Meanwhile, ROUGE-L evaluates the length of
the longest common subsequence. We also measured clinical
efficacy (CE) of reports using the open-source CheXbert
library [43]. CheXbert takes text reports as input and generates
multi-label classification labels for each report, with each label
corresponding to one of the pre-defined thoracic diseases.
Based on these extracted multi-hot labels, we compute pre-
cision (PR), recall (RC), and F1-score (F1) on 1,000 test
samples. These metrics provide additional insight into the
performance of report generation. If not specified, we choose
P3 as a default prompt design in universal interpretation and
k=3 for hierarchical in-context learning.
Clinical question answering: The evaluation of reliable
interaction was performed using a subset of the CMExam
dataset [44]. CMExam is a collection of multiple-choice
questions with official explanations, sourced from the Chinese
National Medical Licensing Examination. Since CMExam
covers a diversity of areas, including many clinical-unrelated
questions, we focused on a subset of the CMExam test set
that specifically addressed “Disease Diagnosis” and “Disease
Treatment,” while excluding questions belonging to the de-
partment of “Traditional Chinese Medicine”. This resulted in
a subset of 2190 question-answer pairs. Since the CMExam
dataset is completely in Chinese, we selected ChatGLM2 [45]
and ChatGLM3 [45], two 6B scale models, as the LLMs
for validation. These models have demonstrated superior Chi-
nese language capabilities compared to other open-source
LLMs. We employed the official prompt design of CMExam,
which required the LLM to make a choice and provide the
accompanying explanation simultaneously. We acknowledge
that our proposed LLM-based knowledge retrieval involves
recursive requests to the LLM and will consume a large
amount of tokens, making experiments using ChatGPT and
GPT-4 unaffordable for us. In experimental results, we report
ACC and F1 for multi-choice selection, and NLG metrics for
reason explanation.
Implementation of domain-specific CADs: In Section III-
A.1, we proposed to incorporate domain-specific CAD models
to interpret images from different medical imaging domain.
In this study, we adopted Chest CADs, Tooth CADs, and
Knee CADs. Chest CADs is composed of a thoracic disease
classifier [46] and a chest X-ray report generation network [7].
The former [46] was trained on the official training split of the
CheXpert [47] dataset, using a learning rate (lr) of 1e−4 for
10 epochs. The report generation network [7] was trained on
the training split of MIMIC-CXR [39] using a single NVIDIA
A100 GPU. We used the Adam optimizer with a learning rate
of 5e−5. For Tooth CAD, we utilized the periodontal diagnosis
model proposed in [48], which was trained on 300 panoramic
dental X-ray images collected from real-world clinics with a
size of 2903x1536. The training was conducted on a NVIDIA
A100 GPU with 80GB memory for a total of 200 epochs. We
set the learning rate as 2e−5 using the Adam optimizer. For
Knee CAD, we adopted the model proposed in [49], which was
trained on 964 knee MRIs captured using a Philips Achieva
3.0T TX MRI scanner from Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital.
The Adam optimizer was used with a weight decay of 1e−4.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
Diagnosis of periodontitis: The patient is suspected to have periodontitis.
Examination of each tooth reveals suspected inflammation around tooth 16, tooth
24, tooth 26, tooth 34, tooth 36, and tooth 46.
Is periodontitis serious?
Periodontitis is a common oral disease that, if left untreated, can lead to issues such
as increased pocket depth and alveolar bone resorption, seriously impacting oral
health. Therefore, if you suspect that you have periodontitis, it is recommended to
seek timely medical attention for clinical assessment and necessary oral X-ray
examinations in order to facilitate early diagnosis and treatment.
[References]
‘’’ … The resulting inflammation affects the periodontal ligament, gingiva,
cementum, and alveolar bone. The gingiva progressively loses its attachment to the
teeth, bone loss begins, and periodontal pockets deepen…
‘’’
Merch Manuals  periodontitis
How is it treated? Can medication alone be effective?
The treatment methods for periodontitis include removal of risk factors, oral
hygiene measures such as scaling and root planing, systemic antibiotics, local
medication, surgical intervention, or extraction of affected teeth. During the
treatment process, it is important to control systemic factors that may affect
periodontal health, such as poor oral hygiene, diabetes, and smoking. Therefore, if
you are diagnosed with periodontitis, it is recommended to seek timely medical
attention and follow a treatment plan provided by a professional dentist in order to
better control and manage periodontitis.
[References] 
‘’’… Treatment of risk factors. Scaling and root planning. Sometimes oral antibiotics, 
antibiotic packs or both. Surgery or extraction. Treatment of modifiable risk factors 
such as poor oral hygiene, diabetes, and smoking improves outcomes…
‘’’
Merch Manuals  periodontitis
Based on the patient's examination results, it was found that the tip of the central
catheter in the left internal jugular vein terminates at the junction of the bronchus and
right atrium. The heart silhouette is moderately to severely enlarged, with mild
pulmonary congestion, and bilateral pleural effusion with atelectasis of the lower lobes
of the lungs. No pneumothorax is observed. These findings suggest that the patient may
have cardiomegaly, pulmonary atelectasis, pulmonary edema, and pleural effusion. It is
recommended that the patient seek medical attention as soon as possible and undergo
further diagnosis and treatment.
Pleural effusion? What should I do? Is it ok?
If the pleural effusion is causing symptoms such as difficulty breathing or chest pain,
drainage may be needed. If the pleural effusion is due to underlying causes such as
pneumonia or surgery, the primary disease should be treated. In many cases,
asymptomatic pleural effusions do not require treatment as they can resolve on their
own. Pleuritic pain can be managed with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
or other oral analgesics. Thoracentesis is a necessary method for treating symptomatic
pleural effusions, and repeated thoracentesis may be needed for recurrent effusions. For
chronic, recurrent, symptomatic pleural effusions, pleurodesis or intermittent drainage
with indwelling catheters may be considered. If the pleural effusion is caused by
pneumonia or malignant tumors, additional special treatment measures may be required.
[References] 
‘’’…The effusion itself generally does not require treatment if it is asymptomatic because 
many effusions resorb spontaneously ... 
‘’’
Merch Manuals  pleural effusion
Hello, based on medical knowledge, X-ray alone may not accurately diagnose pleural
effusion. If X-ray density cannot determine whether it is fluid or lung parenchymal
infiltration, or if it is necessary to determine if the suspected effusion is encapsulated,
lateral decubitus X-ray, chest CT scan, or ultrasound examination should be performed.
These examinations are more sensitive than upright X-ray and can detect effusions as
small as 10 milliliters. Therefore, we recommend a comprehensive examination and
diagnosis under the guidance of a doctor.
Is X-ray enough?
[References] 
‘’’…these tests are more sensitive than upright x-rays and can detect fluid volumes < 10ml ‘’’
Merch Manuals  pleural effusion
In this context, the diagnostic result suggests that there are mild defects present in the
cartilage. Cartilage defects refer to any damage, irregularities, or abnormalities in the
cartilage tissue. These defects can range in severity from mild to severe, with mild
defects indicating relatively minor damage or abnormalities. It is important to consult
with a healthcare professional or a specialist, such as an orthopedic surgeon, who can
provide further interpretation of the MRI results and recommend appropriate treatment
options based on the severity of the cartilage defect.
Any idea to ease my knee pain?
Here are some general strategies that may help ease knee pain:
Quadriceps-strengthening exercises: Strengthening the quadriceps muscles can help
provide support and stability to the knee joint. Exercises like leg extensions, squats, and
lunges may be beneficial. Stabilizing pads, supports, or braces: Depending on the cause of
your knee pain, using stabilizing pads or braces may help provide additional support and
stability to the knee joint. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): NSAIDs, such as
ibuprofen or naproxen, can help reduce pain and inflammation in the knee joint. However,
it's important to consult with a healthcare professional before starting any medication to
ensure it is safe and appropriate for your situation. Identifying and addressing the specific
cause: Knee pain can have various underlying causes, and treatment should be tailored. If
you have chondromalacia, focusing on quadriceps strengthening exercises, balancing with
hamstring exercises, and using arch supports may be helpful. Excessive pronation of the
foot may require orthotic inserts. For stress fractures, it is important to rest and avoid
weight-bearing activities. In cases of intra-articular pathology, surgery may be necessary,
but this decision should be made by a qualified healthcare professional.
[References]
Merch Manuals knee-pain
What tests should be done for knee pain?
For knee pain evaluation, MRI is usually not needed for initial assessment. It is
reasonable to proceed with conservative treatment for several weeks and perform MRI
if symptoms do not improve. However, in cases of severe trauma or suspected intra-
articular injury that cannot be ruled out by other means, MRI should be performed.
Other tests may be performed to investigate related injuries, such as arterial
angiography or CT angiography for suspected arterial injury. Electromyography and/or
nerve conduction studies are rarely performed directly, but are used for patients with
typical neurological symptoms that persist for several weeks to months after injury.
[References]
‘’’… MRI is usually not needed at the initial evaluation. A reasonable approach is to do
MRI if symptoms do not resolve after a few weeks of conservative management…
‘’’
Merch Manuals  knee-pain
Fig. 6. Examples of universal and interactive medical consultation using ChatCAD+, with ChatGPT as the default LLM. The underlined text signifies
information obtained from reputable medical websites, which is not comprehensively incorporated in ChatGPT.
The learning rate was set as 3e−5 for Transformer and graph
attention network components, and 3e−4 for others.
B. Evaluation of a Universal System
To investigate the effectiveness of ChatCAD+ as a universal
CAD system, we evaluated it by (1) quantitatively investigat-
ing its domain identification capability when encountering im-
ages from various domains, and (2) qualitatively investigating
its ability to provide reliable response in different scenarios.
1) Robustness of domain identification: In Fig. 5, we visu-
alize the domain identification performance of different CLIP
models. Compared with the baseline CLIP model, Biomed-
CLIP [26] achieves an impressive performance, showing 100%
accuracy on 2560 images from 7 different domains. It can
even maintain an accuracy of 98.9% when all 9 domains
are involved, while the performance of CLIP is degraded
to 86.3%. These observations demonstrate that BiomedCLIP
has an more in-depth understanding of professional medical
knowledge compared with CLIP, and thus is suitable for
domain identification in our proposed ChatCAD+.
However, to our surprise, PMC-CLIP [50] performs rather
poorly on this task. As shown in Fig. 5, it only achieves
approximate 50% accuracy when three domains are involved.
We hypothesize that this can be attributed to its lack of zero-
shot capability. While PMC-CLIP has demonstrated promising
quality fof fine-tuning on donwstream tasks, its lack of zero-
shot inference capability may hinder its wide-speard applica-
tion. In conclusion, BiomedCLIP can be a better choice than
both CLIP and PMC-CLIP for domain identification.
2) Reliability of consultations: Fig. 6 demonstrates the uni-
versal application and reliability of our proposed method. The
ChatCAD+ can process different medical images and provide
proper diagnostic reports. Users can interact with ChatCAD+
and ask additional questions for further clarification. By lever-
aging external medical knowledge, the enhanced ChatCAD+
is capable of delivering medical advice in a more professional
manner. In Fig. 6, each reply from ChatCAD+ includes a
reference, and the pertinent knowledge obtained from the
external database is underlined for emphasis. For instance, in
the scenario where the question is raised about whether a chest
X-ray is sufficient for diagnosing pleural effusion, ChatGPT
would simply recommend a CT scan without providing a
convincing explanation. In contrast, ChatCAD+ is capable of
informing the patient that CT scans have the capability to
detect effusions as small as 10 milliliters, thereby providing a
more detailed and informative response.
C. Evaluation of Report Generation
We begin by comparing our approach to state-of-the-art
(SOTA) report generation methods, while also examining the
impact of various prompt designs. Subsequently, we assess
the generalizability of our reliable report generation model
by utilizing diverse LLMs. Following this, we explore the
impact of hierarchical in-context learning by changing the
number of retrieved reports. We then proceed to qualitatively
showcase the advanced capabilities of ChatCAD+ in report
generation. Finally, we compare our specialist-based system
against others’ generalist medical AI systems.
1) Comparison with SOTA methods: The numerical results
of different methods was compared and presented in Table III.
The advantage of ChatCAD+ lies in its superior performance
across multiple evaluation metrics compared to both previous
models and different prompt settings. Particularly, ChatCAD+
(P3) stands out with the highest scores in terms of C-BLEU,
METEOR, REC, and F1. Despite the inferiority in specific
metrics, ChatCAD+ (P3) still holds a significant advantage

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
TABLE III
COMPARATIVE RESULTS WITH PREVIOUS STUDIES AND DIFFERENT PROMPT SETTINGS. P3 IS THE DEFAULT PROMPT SETTING IN THIS STUDY.
Model
Size
C-BLEU
ROUGE-L
METEOR
PRE
REC
F1
R2GenCMN [7]
244M
3.525
18.351
21.045
0.578
0.411
0.458
VLCI [8]
357M
3.834
16.217
20.806
0.617
0.299
0.377
ChatCAD (P3)
256M+175B
3.594
16.791
23.146
0.526
0.603
0.553
ChatCAD+ (P1)
256M+175B
4.073
16.820
22.700
0.548
0.484
0.502
ChatCAD+ (P2)
256M+175B
4.407
17.266
23.302
0.538
0.597
0.557
ChatCAD+ (P3)
256M+175B
4.409
17.344
24.337
0.531
0.615
0.564
TABLE IV
EVALUATION OF RELIABLE REPORT GENERATION USING DIFFERENT LLMS.
Model
Size
Reliable
C-BLEU
BLEU-1
BLEU-2
BLEU-3
BLEU-4
ROUGE-L
METEOR
PRE
REC
F1
ChatGLM2 [45]
6B
%
2.073
16.999
3.426
0.926
0.313
14.119
23.008
0.518
0.632
0.553
"
3.236
25.172
5.268
1.461
0.566
15.559
23.397
0.501
0.639
0.555
PMC-LLaMA [51]
7B
%
1.709
15.003
2.432
0.748
0.313
13.983
20.590
0.492
0.702
0.532
"
1.059
6.5059
1.591
0.504
0.241
8.140
18.551
0.477
0.664
0.525
MedAlpaca [52]
7B
%
1.554
30.710
6.143
1.906
0.819
12.729
11.865
0.526
0.464
0.484
"
3.031
30.795
7.107
2.408
1.107
14.761
15.711
0.507
0.518
0.505
Mistral [53]
7B
%
3.261
27.806
6.068
1.463
0.458
16.132
21.999
0.558
0.444
0.485
"
3.547
30.851
7.178
1.698
0.493
17.493
22.347
0.543
0.597
0.558
LLaMA [2]
7B
%
0.807
7.575
1.265
0.337
0.128
10.016
17.194
0.495
0.589
0.519
"
0.966
7.790
1.525
0.423
0.178
10.237
18.344
0.478
0.625
0.535
LLaMA2 [54]
7B
%
1.298
14.929
2.717
0.531
0.132
12.016
19.958
0.481
0.588
0.519
"
3.579
24.798
5.826
1.638
0.693
16.850
23.950
0.512
0.561
0.528
LLaMA [2]
13B
%
0.810
6.824
1.393
0.331
0.113
8.959
16.647
0.486
0.452
0.459
"
0.973
8.295
1.521
0.439
0.197
9.813
18.073
0.498
0.465
0.463
LLaMA2 [54]
13B
%
2.940
23.536
5.173
1.390
0.441
15.053
21.938
0.531
0.564
0.538
"
3.650
25.080
6.148
1.728
0.666
16.646
24.015
0.533
0.571
0.543
ChatGPT [1]
175B
%
3.594
28.453
6.371
1.656
0.556
16.791
23.146
0.526
0.603
0.553
"
4.409
31.625
7.570
2.107
0.760
17.344
24.337
0.531
0.615
0.564
across other metrics, which validates its advanced overall
performance. Note that ChatCAD+ (P3) shows a significant
advantage over ChatCAD (P3) on all NLG and CE metrics,
which underscores the rationality of hierarchical in-context
learning. These results suggest that ChatCAD+ (P3) is capable
of generating high-quality responses that are not only fluent
and grammatical but also clinically accurate, making it a
promising model for conversational tasks.
Additionally, the impact of prompt designs can also be ob-
served. Generally speaking, P3 achieves the best performance
while P1 leads to unsatisfying results. This phenomenon may
be attributed to the similarity of P3 to human language style,
as it reflects the severity of the disease using rhetoric, whereas
P1 directly displays the probability without post-process.
2) Investigation of generalizability: In Table IV, we explored
the generalizability of reliable report generation by adopting
different LLMs. From the results, several noteworthy observa-
tions can be drawn:
• Our proposed method consistently improves the quality of
generated radiology reports when combined with different
LLMs, except for PMC-LLaMA. This finding demon-
strates the effectiveness of our approach.
• Domain-specific
LLMs,
such as
PMC-LLaMA and
MedAlpaca, do not yield competitive enough results
on reliable report generation. Despite being specifically
trained on medical corpus, their performance falls short.
Even with the enhancement provided by reliable report
generation, MedAlpaca only achieves an F1 score of
0.505. Moreover, PMC-LLaMA does not perform well
with reliable report generation, leading to significant
performance degradation. We hypothesize that their infe-
rior instruction following capability contributes to these
results. Previous studies have emphasized the importance
of properly controlling domain-specific fine-tuning to
ensure conversational capability in LLMs [55]. Unlike
MedAlpaca, PMC-LLaMA fully fine-tuned its model
weights during training, which could result in worse per-
formance degradation compared to parameter-efficiently
tuned MedAlpaca. We believe this is the reason why
reliable report generation shows inferior performance
when combined with PMC-LLaMA.
• A larger model size does not always guarantee better
performance. For example, LLaMA (7B) and LLaMA
(13B) exhibit inferior performance compared to Chat-

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
0
1
2
3
BLEU-1
4
5
28
29
30
31
32
0
1
2
3
BLEU-2
4
5
6.2
6.6
7.0
7.4
7.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
BLEU-3
1.66
1.79
1.92
2.05
2.18
0
1
2
3
4
5
BLEU-4
0.56
0.63
0.70
0.77
0.84
0
1
2
3
4
5
ROUGE-L
16.7
16.9
17.1
17.3
17.5
C-BLEU
Fig. 7.
Ablation study of hierarchical in-context learning w.r.t. the
number of retrieved reports. A range of values , varying from 0 to 5,
was chosen for k, and its influence is evaluated on several NLG metrics.
R2GenCMN
0
20
40
100
120
140
60
80
Report Length (#words)
VLCI
ChatCAD
ChatCAD+ (k=1)
ChatCAD+ (k=3)
ChatCAD+ (k=5)
Radiologist
Fig. 8. Distributions of report length with respect to the changing of k.
GLM2 (6B) and other 7B-scale LLMs. Thus, blindly
pursuing model size may not be the optimal solution.
• While ChatGPT unsurprisingly achieves the best over-
all performance, other LLMs like LLaMA2 (13B) and
Mistral (7B) still demonstrate comparable performance.
In particular, Mistral (7B) achieves the second-best F1
score among all the LLMs evaluated while maintaining
competent NLG metrics. This highlights the potential ap-
plication of consumer-level LLMs in clinical workflows.
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN CHATCAD+ AND GENERALIST
MODELS IN THE MEDICAL IMAGING DOMAIN. EXCESSIVELY LOW
RESULTS ARE REPRESENTED BY SLASH.
Method
C-BLEU
ROUGE-L
METEOR
PRE
REC
F1
PMC-VQA [56]
/
5.978
2.685
0.221
0.109
0.115
RadFM [57]
/
7.366
4.756
0.487
0.095
0.156
ChatCAD+ (ours)
4.409
17.344
24.337
0.531
0.615
0.564
3) Ablation study of hierarchical in-context learning: We in-
vestigate the impact of the retrieved top-k reports on reliable
report generation in Fig. 7. As k increases, the overall perfor-
mance shows an upward trend. Moreover, in most cases, the
largest improvement in performance occurs when k changes
from 0 to 1. This indicates that regardless of the quantity, as
long as templates are provided as references, the quality of
generated reports can be significantly enhanced. Meanwhile,
the performance improvement tends to saturate around k=3,
and further increasing k does not result in more significant
improvement, which validates the rationality of the adopted
default setting.
The distribution of report length is also demonstrated in
Fig. 8 by varying the value of k. Report length serves as an
important criterion [7] to measure the similarity to ground
truth radiology reports. A straightforward observation is that
the distribution of ChatCAD exhibits a significant shift from
that of the radiologist. In contrast, ChatCAD+ shows a more
fitted curve irrespective of the value of k.
4) Qualitative analysis: In Fig. 9, each row showcases a
chest X-ray along with its corresponding ground-truth annota-
tion. To enhance clarity, we have color-coded the presence of
certain findings in the generated reports. This visual represen-
tation allows for a clear illustration of the differences among
the methods. For example, in the first chest X-ray image,
it demonstrates the presence of four abnormalities, including
cardiomegaly. However, both R2GenCMN and VLCI methods
fail to acknowledge the existence of cardiomegaly in their
generated reports. In the second row, the other two methods
struggle to detect any abnormalities from the chest X-ray,
while our method successfully identifies the possibility of
cardiomegaly. The same trend can be observed in the third
row. By including this qualitative analysis, we aim to highlight
the advantages of our ChatCAD+ method and provide a
comprehensive evaluation of the template retrieval system (hi-
erarchical in-context learning). This comparison demonstrates
the improved report quality achieved by our proposed method.
5) Comparison with generalists: While ChatCAD+ aims to
integrate multiple specialist AI models incrementally, some
recent studies [51], [57] have investigated generalist AI mod-
els for medical imaging. Hence, we quantitatively compare
ChatCAD+ to generalists to investigate its superiority.
Existing generalist models typically follow the architecture
of DeepMind’s Flamingo [21] and Salesforce’s BLIP-2 [22].
For instance, RadFM [57] and PMC-VQA [56] are trained
based on Flamingo and BLIP-2, respectively. We compared
ChatCAD+ with PMC-VQA and Flamingo using the same test
set, and conducted zero-shot inference, as shown in Table V.
Overall, our method demonstrates significant advantages over
the generalist models. It is worth noting that these generalist
models exhibit extremely low values on C-BLEU, indicating
that generalist models can only generate very short responses
and lack the ability to provide comprehensive diagnostic
information like ours. Generally speaking, a generalist model
implies that a single image encoder needs to interpret se-
mantic information for all possible input images. This is
challenging to achieve in the medical imaging domain due
to distinct morphological and clinical semantic differences
among different medical imaging modalities, which require a
deep understanding of professional medical knowledge. Based
on these reasons, we believe that it is still not the ChatGPT
time for medical imaging analysis, and specialist models will
long been a preferable solution. Such preference of specialist
model is also mentioned in a related survey [58].
It is also important to note that a major advantage of
ChatCAD+ lies in their capability for continual learning.
By incorporating the LLM, we can combine decisions from
multiple CAD models, enabling fine-tuning of each CAD
model individually and also their incremental ensembling. This

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
ap and lateral views of the chest 
were obtained . the heart size is 
normal . the mediastinal contour is 
unremarkable . there are bilateral 
pleural effusions with overlying 
atelectasis . there is mild pulmonary 
edema . there is no pneumothorax.
lung volumes are low. the 
mediastinal contours are grossly 
unremarkable . there is mild 
pulmonary edema. small bilateral 
pleural effusions are noted . patchy 
opacities in the lung bases likely 
reflect areas of atelectasis. no 
pneumothorax is identified . there 
are no acute osseous abnormalities .
R2GenCMN
Based on the information provided, the chest x-
ray shows that the patient has low lung 
volumes and a moderately enlarged heart. The 
mediastinal contours appear normal, but there 
is mild pulmonary edema and small bilateral 
pleural effusions. Additionally, there are patchy 
opacities in the lung bases, which may indicate 
areas of atelectasis. No pneumothorax or acute 
osseous abnormalities are identified.
VLCI
ChatCAD+
ap upright and lateral views of the 
chest provided . lung volumes are 
low limiting assessment. there is no 
focal consolidation effusion or 
pneumothorax. the mediastinal 
silhouette is normal . imaged 
osseous structures are intact . no 
free air below the right 
hemidiaphragm is seen .
pa and lateral views of the chest. 
there is no focal consolidation 
effusion or pneumothorax . the 
cardiomediastinal silhouette is 
normal . osseous structures are 
intact . no free air below the right 
hemidiaphragm is seen.
The chest x-ray reveals low lung volumes, but 
there is no evidence of consolidation, effusion, 
or pneumothorax. The cardiomediastinal 
silhouette appears normal, and the imaged 
osseous structures are intact. No free air is 
seen below the right hemidiaphragm. There is 
a possibility of cardiomegaly.
Cardiomegaly, Edema,
Atelectasis, Pleural Effusion
Cardiomegaly, Edema
ap portable upright view of the chest. 
a left chest wall port-a-cath is seen 
with its tip extending into the region 
of the right atrium . lung volumes are 
low limiting assessment . there is 
diffuse pulmonary edema with 
probable small bilateral pleural 
effusions . the heart size cannot be 
assessed . mediastinal contour is 
grossly unremarkable . bony 
structures are intact .
tube is seen below the level of the 
diaphragm. there are low lung 
volumes which the bronchovascular
markings . there is bibasilar 
atelectasis . no definite focal 
consolidation is seen . there is no 
large pleural effusion or 
pneumothorax . the cardiac silhouette 
is not enlarged . the aorta is calcified
The chest x-ray shows a left chest wall port-a-cath 
with its tip extending into the region of the right 
atrium. Lung volumes are low, which limits 
assessment. Diffuse pulmonary edema is present. 
The size of the heart remains moderately enlarged.
Bony structures are intact. There is no definite 
focal pulmonary abnormality, and no evidence of 
consolidation or atelectasis. However, there is a 
likelihood of edema and pleural effusion. Further 
evaluation may be necessary to determine the 
underlying cause.
Cardiomegaly
Chest X-ray and 
Ground-Truth 
Fig. 9.
Qualitative analysis on different report generation methods. chest X-rays and corresponding ground-truth annotations are provided. The
presence of a certain finding in a report is marked in a certain color for a clear illustration.
TABLE VI
VALIDATION OF RELIABLE INTERACTION FROM PERSPECTIVES OF BOTH
MULTI-CHOICE SELECTION AND REASON EXPLANATION.
Method
Multi-choice
Reason Explanation
ACC
F1
C-BLEU
ROUGE-L
ChatGLM2 [45]
0.435
0.427
2.430
11.396
ChatGLM2+Ours
0.465
0.461
7.930
18.957
ChatGLM3 [45]
0.458
0.455
3.270
14.915
ChatGLM3+Ours
0.472
0.505
7.974
19.302
flexibility allows us to adapt and integrate new models rapidly
in response to emerging situations without the need of huge
computation resources.
D. Evaluation of clinical question answering
To evaluate the efficacy of clinical question answering, we
adopt a comprehensive approach that combines quantitative
analysis (through testing on the CMExam dataset) and qual-
itative analysis (by posing potential questions in real-world
scenarios). This enables a thorough examination and provides
insight into how the system functions in practical context.
In Table VI, we choose ChatGLM2 and ChatGLM3 as the
LLM and present the performance of multi-choice selection
and reason explanation with and without our proposed knowl-
edge retrieval method on a subset of CMExam dataset (refer-
ring to Sec. IV-A). It is important to note that the results of
multi-choice selection are directly generated by the LLM via
prompt design, without intervention of any text encoders. We
observe that our proposed method can consistently improve
the performance of question answering for both ChatGLM2
and ChatGLM3. Interestingly, we find that the generation
of reason explanations is significantly enhanced compared to
multi-choice selection. For ChatGLM2, the ROUGE-L score
is improved from 11.396 to 18.957, and for ChatGLM3, it is
improved from 14.925 to 19.302. However, the improvement
in multi-choice selection is not pronounced. We hypothesize
that this discrepancy arises because the LLM may occasionally
select correct answer based on unrigorous or even incorrect
reasoning. In such cases, the LLM’s reliability is compro-
mised. However, with our proposed method, the reasoning
behind the correct answer becomes more convincing, enabling
reliable interaction for patients in need.
Considering qualitative analysis, the effectiveness of our
proposed LLM-based knowledge retrieval method is compared
with a baseline method that does not rely on a LLM. Such
methods tend to follow the paradigm of LangChain [59], which
involves dividing the text into paragraphs and then utilizing
sentence transformers to compare the similarity between the
user query and all paragraphs. This kind of knowledge retrieval
method can hardly handle the professional medical knowledge
database. We select the implementation in [59] as the baseline
and compare it with our proposed method in Table VII and
Table VIII, where “K” and “A” indicate “retrieved knowledge”
and “answer from the LLM”, respectively. Note that ChatGPT
is the default LLM in this qualitative analysis.
In accordance with the structure of the Merck Manual, each
medical topic is divided into five main sections: “abstract”,
“symptoms and signs”, “diagnosis”, “treatment” and “progno-

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
Q1 Is pleural effusion serious?
K1 (Baseline) Under normal circumstances, a thin layer of pleural fluid (10-20mL) covers the surfaces of the visceral and parietal pleura, with a composition
similar to plasma but with lower protein content (<1.5g/dL [<15 g/L]). Pleural effusions are usually classified into exudates, transudates, and fluid accumulation
based on laboratory characteristics of the fluid (see criteria for diagnosing exudative pleural effusions in the table).Regardless of unilateral or bilateral
involvement, leaky effusions usually require little investigation and can be treated, while exudative effusions require identification of the underlying cause.
Various factors can cause pleural effusions (see the table for causes of pleural effusions). Leaky pleural effusions are caused by an increase in systemic
circulatory hydrostatic pressure and a decrease in plasma colloid osmotic pressure.
K1 (Ours) Some pleural effusions are asymptomatic and are discovered incidentally during physical examination or on chest x-ray. Many cause dyspnea,
pleuritic chest pain, or both. Pleuritic chest pain, a vague discomfort or sharp pain that worsens during inspiration, indicates inflammation of the parietal
pleura. Pain is usually felt over the inflamed site, but referred pain is possible. The posterior and peripheral portions of the diaphragmatic pleura are supplied
by the lower 6 intercostal nerves, and irritation there may cause pain in the lower chest wall or abdomen that may simulate intra-abdominal disease. Irritation
of the central portion of the diaphragmatic pleura, innervated by the phrenic nerves, causes pain referred to the neck and shoulder. Physical examination
reveals absent tactile fremitus, dullness to percussion, and decreased breath sounds on the side of the effusion. These findings can also be caused by pleural
thickening.
... Pericardial rub is best heard over the left border of the sternum in the 3rd and 4th intercostal spaces, is characteristically a to-and-fro sound synchronous
with the heartbeat, and is not influenced significantly by respiration. Sensitivity and specificity of the physical examination for detecting effusion are probably
low.
A1 (ChatGPT Only) Pleural effusion can be serious depending on the underlying cause and the amount of fluid accumulated in the pleural space. It can be
a symptom of various medical conditions such as congestive heart failure, pneumonia, cancer, or kidney disease. If left untreated, pleural effusion can lead
to breathing difficulties and complications. It’s important to consult with a healthcare provider for proper diagnosis and treatment.
A1 (Ours) The severity of pleural effusion needs to be determined based on the patient’s specific situation. Generally, a large amount of effusion can cause
symptoms such as dyspnea and chest pain, but some patients may not have obvious symptoms. Physical examination can reveal reduced breath sounds on the
effusion side, dullness to percussion, and possibly pleural friction rub. However, the sensitivity and specificity of physical examination for pleural effusion
are both low, so clinical symptoms and imaging examinations need to be combined to determine the severity of the effusion and treatment plan. Common
causes of pleural effusion include heart failure, pneumonia, and tuberculosis
Q2 What should I do after getting lung atelectasis?
K2 (Baseline) do not recommend oral or intravenous corticosteroids because they have not shown efficacy in metal fume fever. Patients with pre-existing lung
disease (such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) rarely require treatment and hospitalization due to worsening of pre-existing conditions.
If severe cases of either syndrome cause respiratory distress, treatment methods used for ARDS (such as mechanical ventilation and positive end-expiratory
pressure [PEEP]) may also be used. ” , ”Atelectasis”: ”Abs”: ”Atelectasis is collapse of lung tissue with loss of volume. Patients may have dyspnea or
respiratory failure if atelectasis is extensive. They may also develop pneumonia. Atelectasis is usually asymptomatic, but hypoxemia and pleuritic chest pain
may be present in certain cases. Diagnosis is by chest x-ray. Treatment includes maintaining coughing and deep breathing and treating the cause.”
K2 (Ours) Maximizing cough and deep breathing If obstruction by tumor or foreign body is suspected, bronchoscopy Evidence for the efficacy of most
treatments for atelectasis is weak or absent. Nonetheless, commonly recommended measures include chest physiotherapy to help maintain ventilation and
clearance of secretions, and encouragement of lung expansion techniques such as directed cough, deep breathing exercises, and use of an incentive spirometer.
In ambulatory patients, exercise (eg, walking) is a desirable way to promote deep breathing. For patients who are not intubated and do not have excessive
secretions, continuous positive airway pressure may help. For patients who are intubated and mechanically ventilated, positive end-expiratory pressure and/or
higher tidal volume ventilation may help.
... Most importantly, the cause of atelectasis (eg, mucous plug, foreign body, tumor, mass, pulmonary effusion) should be treated. For persistent mucous
plugging, nebulized dornase alfa and sometimes bronchodilators are tried. N-Acetylcysteine is usually avoided because it can cause bronchoconstriction. If
other measures are ineffective or if a cause of obstruction other than mucous plugging is suspected, bronchoscopy should be done.
A2 (ChatGPT Only) I’m not a doctor, but I can provide you with general information on lung atelectasis. It’s important to follow your healthcare provider’s
advice for your specific situation. In general, treatment for lung atelectasis may involve addressing the underlying cause, such as removing any blockages in
the airways, treating infections, or providing oxygen therapy. Your healthcare provider may also recommend techniques to help re-expand the collapsed lung
tissue, such as deep breathing exercises, chest physiotherapy, or using a device called a spirometer. Make sure to follow up with your healthcare provider for
proper diagnosis and treatment.
A2 (Ours) The treatment methods for pulmonary atelectasis include maintaining cough and deep breathing, chest physical therapy, exercise, continuous
positive airway pressure, etc. However, the evidence for the effectiveness of these treatments is not sufficient, so the treatment plan needs to be developed
according to the specific situation of the patient. If there is suspicion of tumor or foreign body obstruction, bronchoscopy examination is needed. Opioid drugs
can be used to relieve severe pleural pain, but cough suppressant drugs should be avoided. For the causes of pulmonary atelectasis such as mucus plugs,
foreign bodies, tumors, masses, pleural effusions, etc., targeted treatments should be used.
TABLE VII
COMPARISON BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE RETRIEVAL METHODS. CHATGPT IS SELECTED AS THE DEFAULT LLM. COMPLETELY UNRELATED
KNOWLEDGE IS MARKED IN RED, PARTIALLY RELATED KNOWLEDGE IS MARKED IN PURPLE. RELATED AND IMPORTANT KNOWLEDGE IS IN GREEN.
sis” as shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, to assess the effectiveness
of knowledge retrieval, all the questions presented in Table VII
and Table VIII are implicitly associated with certain sections.
If the retrieved knowledge comes from the corresponding
section, we label it as “related”. If the knowledge is retrieved
from a different section but still belongs to the same medical
topic, we label it as “partially related”. Otherwise, if the
knowledge comes from a different medical topic altogether, we
consider it “unrelated”. For example, in the case of Q1 (“Is
pleural effusion serious?”), the target section is “symptoms
and signs”. Unfortunately, the baseline method retrieves infor-
mation from the “abstract” section, which is only “partially
related” and cannot directly provide a reliable answer. In
the case of Q3, we ask for the treatment of periodontitis.
Our proposed method successfully retrieves the “treatment”
section of periodontitis, while the baseline method mistakenly
retrieves information about palmoplantar keratodermas. As a
result, we labeled it as “unrelated”. We hypothesize the reason
behind this mistake is that palmoplantar keratodermas can lead
to secondary infections of periodontitis. These results clearly
illustrate the advancement of our method. On the contrary,
[59] struggles to identify relevant medical topics due to limited
vocabulary size and understanding. This issue can be worse
if the question of the user does not explicitly point to any
medical topics or involve multiple medical entities.
We also demonstrate the answer of ChatGPT without ad-
ditional knowledge. Results reveal that ChatGPT’s responses
are less useful and accurate. Specifically, for the first question,
ChatGPT fails to elaborate on the fact that the severity
of pleural effusion depends on the specific circumstances,
instead merely stating that untreated pleural effusion can
lead to complications. This omission prevents a thorough
understanding of the condition. Furthermore, in Q4, ChatGPT
provides an extensive list of possible tests for the patient,
which can potentially cause unnecessary anxiety and expenses.
In contrast, our reliable interaction highlights that an MRI
is not imperative for initial assessment and should only be
considered if knee pain does not improve after several weeks
of conservative treatment. This clarification offers valuable
guidance and prevents unwarranted medical interventions.

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
Q3 How to treat periodontitis? Is taking medication enough?
K3 (Baseline) Esophageal cancer can occur at a young age. Unna-Thost disease and Vorner disease: autosomal dominant inheritance. Papillon-Lef`evre
syndrome: autosomal recessive inheritance, onset within 6 months after birth. Severe periodontitis can lead to tooth loss. Vohwinkel syndrome: autosomal
dominant inheritance, patients may experience progressive toe and finger amputation and high-frequency hearing loss. Diffuse non-epidermolytic palmoplantar
keratoderma: this autosomal dominant inherited form develops in infancy, causing a sharply defined symmetric keratoderma affecting the entire palm and sole.
Treatment: Symptomatic treatment includes the use of emollients, keratolytic agents, and physical methods for removal.
K3 (Ours) Treatment of risk factors Scaling and root planing Sometimes oral antibiotics, antibiotic packs, or both Surgery or extraction Treatment of modifiable
risk factors such as poor oral hygiene, diabetes, and smoking improves outcomes. For all forms of periodontitis, the first phase of treatment consists of thorough
scaling (professional cleaning with hand or ultrasonic instruments) and root planing (removal of diseased or toxin-affected cementum and dentin followed by
smoothing of the root) to remove plaque and calculus deposits. Thorough home oral hygiene is necessary and includes careful brushing and flossing to help
clean. It may include chlorhexidine swabs or rinses. A therapist should help teach the patient how to do these procedures. The patient is re-evaluated after 3
weeks. If pockets are no deeper than 4 mm at this point, the only treatment needed is regular cleanings. Sometimes a flap of gum tissue is made to allow
access for scaling and planing of deeper parts of the root. If deeper pockets persist, systemic antibiotics can be used. A common regimen is amoxicillin 500
mg orally 3 times a day for 10 days. In addition, a gel containing doxycycline or microspheres of minocycline can be placed into isolated recalcitrant pockets.
These drugs are resorbed in 2 weeks. Another approach is to surgically eliminate the pocket and recontour the bone (pocket reduction/elimination surgery) so
that the patient can clean the depth of the normal crevice (sulcus) between the tooth and gingiva. In certain patients, regenerative surgery and bone grafting are
done to encourage alveolar bone growth. Splinting of loose teeth and selective reshaping of tooth surfaces to eliminate traumatic occlusion may be necessary.
Extractions are often necessary in advanced disease. Contributing systemic factors should be controlled before initiating periodontal therapy. Ninety percent of
patients with necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis due to HIV (HIV-associated periodontitis) respond to combined treatment with scaling and planing, irrigation
of the sulcus with povidone-iodine (which the dentist applies with a syringe), regular use of chlorhexidine mouth rinses, and systemic antibiotics, usually
metronidazole 250 mg orally 3 times a day for 14 days. Localized aggressive periodontitis requires periodontal surgery plus oral antibiotics (eg, amoxicillin
500 mg 4 times a day or metronidazole 250 mg 3 times a day for 14 days).
A3 (ChatGPT Only) Treating periodontitis usually involves a combination of professional dental treatments. Medication alone may not be enough to fully
treat periodontitis. Professional dental treatments may include scaling and root planing to remove plaque and tartar from the teeth and roots, as well as possibly
surgical procedures to correct any damage to the gums and bone. It’s important to follow your dentist’s recommendations closely and attend regular dental
check-ups to monitor your progress and make any necessary adjustments to your treatment plan.
A3 (Ours) The treatment of periodontitis requires a comprehensive approach that considers risk factors, scaling and root planing, oral antibiotics, and local
medications. For all cases of periodontitis, the first stage of treatment involves thorough cleaning, scaling and root planing, and reinforcement of daily oral
hygiene. If deep periodontal pockets are present, systemic antibiotics may be used, with amoxicillin 500mg orally, three times a day for 10 days being a
commonly used method. The second stage of treatment involves surgical removal of periodontal pockets and bone reshaping to allow the patient to self-clean
the base of the gingival sulcus. Localized aggressive periodontitis requires periodontal surgery in combination with oral antibiotics. At the same time, systemic
factors such as poor oral hygiene, diabetes, and smoking must be controlled to improve the prognosis. Therefore, drug therapy alone is not sufficient and
comprehensive treatment is necessary.
Q4 What tests should be done for knee pain?
K4 (Baseline) Patellar tendon tear: the patella is palpable and displaced upwards (high-riding patella). Transverse patellar fracture: a gap between the two
pieces of the patella may be palpable. However, due to significant local swelling, these symptoms may be mistaken for knee ligament injury with joint effusion.
If a patient presents with knee swelling and pain after injury, the clinician will ask the patient to sit down and attempt to extend the injured leg to test knee
extension actively or lie flat and elevate the injured leg. After knee swelling following trauma, remember to test the knee’s ability for independent extension.
Routine knee joint X-ray examination should be performed. Knee X-rays can show a high or low position of the patella. X-rays can reveal dislocation or
patellar fractures, but they may also appear normal.
K4 (Ours) Not every patient requires x-rays. However, anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique x-rays are often taken to exclude fractures. The Ottawa knee rules
are used to limit x-rays to patients more likely to have a fracture that requires specific treatments. X-rays should be taken only if one of the following is
present: Age > 55, Isolated tenderness of the patella (with no other bone tenderness of the knee), Tenderness of fibular head, Inability to flex the knee 90°,
Inability to bear weight both immediately and in the emergency department for 4 steps (with or without limping).
MRI is usually not needed at the initial evaluation. A reasonable approach is to do MRI if symptoms do not resolve after a few weeks of conservative
management. However, MRI is often done when severe injury or significant intra-articular injury is suspected or cannot be otherwise excluded. Other tests
may be done to check for related injuries: Arteriography or CT angiography to check for suspected arterial injuries Electromyography and/or nerve conduction
studies, which are rarely done immediately but more typically done when nerve symptoms persist weeks to months after the injury.
A4 (ChatGPT Only) When diagnosing knee pain, there are several tests that healthcare professionals may recommend to determine the underlying cause.
These tests may include: (1) Physical examination: A healthcare provider will assess your knee by examining its range of motion, stability, and tenderness.
(2) X-rays: X-rays can help identify issues such as fractures, arthritis, or bone abnormalities in the knee. (3) MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging): MRI
scans provide detailed images of soft tissues like ligaments, tendons, and cartilage, which can help diagnose conditions such as ligament tears or cartilage
damage. (4) CT scan (Computed Tomography): CT scans can provide detailed images of the bones and joints in the knee, helping to diagnose fractures or
bone abnormalities. (5) Ultrasound: Ultrasound imaging can help evaluate soft tissue structures like tendons and ligaments for injuries or inflammation. (6)
Arthroscopy: In some cases, a minimally invasive procedure called arthroscopy may be recommended to directly visualize and diagnose issues within the knee
joint. It’s important to consult with a healthcare professional to determine which tests are necessary based on your specific symptoms and medical history.
A4 (Ours) For knee pain evaluation, MRI is usually not needed for initial assessment. It is reasonable to proceed with conservative treatment for several
weeks and perform MRI if symptoms do not improve. However, in cases of severe trauma or suspected intra-articular injury that cannot be ruled out by other
means, MRI should be performed. Other tests may be performed to investigate related injuries, such as arterial angiography or CT angiography for suspected
arterial injury. Electromyography and/or nerve conduction studies are rarely performed directly, but are used for patients with typical neurological symptoms
that persist for several weeks to months after injury. Therefore, which tests are needed depends on the specific situation of the patient.
TABLE VIII
COMPARISON BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE RETRIEVAL METHODS. CHATGPT IS SELECTED AS THE DEFAULT LLM. COMPLETELY UNRELATED
KNOWLEDGE IS MARKED IN RED, PARTIALLY RELATED KNOWLEDGE IS MARKED IN PURPLE. RELATED AND IMPORTANT KNOWLEDGE IS IN GREEN.
We believe that this comparison could further highlight the
effectiveness of our proposed reliable interaction.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have developed ChatCAD+, a universal
and reliable interactive CAD system that can accept images
of different domains as valid input. We expect that the
proposed paradigm of universal CAD networks can motivate
the advancement of cross-domain model literature in medical
image domain. Furthermore, the hierarchical in-context learn-
ing enhances the report generation ability of ChatCAD+ in a
training-free manner and let it act more like a radiologist. The
LLM-based knowledge retrieval method enables the LLM to
search by itself, and utilize the external medical knowledge
database to provide convincing medical treatments. In this
way, our ChatCAD+ has utilized the Merck Manuals database
as its primary external knowledge database, which may be
considered limited in its scope. However, we are confident
in the versatility of our proposed LLM-based knowledge
retrieval method, as it can be readily adapted to incorporate
other databases. By doing so, we anticipate that the reliability
of ChatCAD+ will be greatly enhanced. There are several
limitations that must be acknowledged. First, while we have
succeeded in enhancing the report generation capacity of our
model to closely resemble that of a radiologist, it relies on
additional report database. Second, the knowledge retrieval
method we employed is relatively slow, as its efficacy is
closely related to the response speed of the OpenAI API.

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
These limitations provide an opportunity for future research
to address them and improve upon the current findings.
REFERENCES
[1] OpenAI. (2023) Chatgpt: Optimizing language models for dialogue.
[Online]. Available: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/ 1, 8
[2] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lacroix, B. Rozi`ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez,
A. Joulin, E. Grave, and G. Lample, “Llama: Open and efficient
foundation language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
1, 8
[3] J. Qiu, L. Li, J. Sun, J. Peng, P. Shi, R. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. Lam, F. P.-W.
Lo, B. Xiao et al., “Large ai models in health informatics: Applications,
challenges, and the future,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11568, 2023. 1
[4] V. W. Xue, P. Lei, and W. C. Cho, “The potential impact of chat-
gpt in clinical and translational medicine,” Clinical and Translational
Medicine, vol. 13, no. 3, 2023. 1
[5] Z. Cui, Y. Fang, L. Mei, B. Zhang, B. Yu, J. Liu, C. Jiang, Y. Sun, L. Ma,
J. Huang et al., “A fully automatic ai system for tooth and alveolar
bone segmentation from cone-beam ct images,” Nature communications,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 2096, 2022. 1
[6] S. Wang, X. Ouyang, T. Liu, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Follow my eye:
Using gaze to supervise computer-aided diagnosis,” IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging, 2022. 1
[7] Z. Chen, Y. Shen, Y. Song, and X. Wan, “Generating radiology reports
via memory-driven transformer,” in Proceedings of the Joint Conference
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing, Aug. 2021. 1, 6, 8, 9
[8] W. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Wang, G. Li, J. Zhu, and L. Lin, “Visual-linguistic
causal intervention for radiology report generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.09117, 2023. 1, 8
[9] S. Wang, Z. Zhao, X. Ouyang, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Chatcad:
Interactive computer-aided diagnosis on medical image using large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07257, 2023. 2, 4
[10] L. Milecki, V. Kalogeiton, S. Bodard, D. Anglicheau, J.-M. Correas,
M.-O. Timsit, and M. Vakalopoulou, “Medimp: Medical images and
prompts for renal transplant representation learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12445, 2023. 2
[11] C. Niu and G. Wang, “Ct multi-task learning with a large image-text
(lit) model,” bioRxiv, pp. 2023–04, 2023. 2
[12] D. Ueda, Y. Mitsuyama, H. Takita, D. Horiuchi, S. L. Walston,
H. Tatekawa, and Y. Miki, “Diagnostic performance of chatgpt from
patient history and imaging findings on the diagnosis please quizzes,”
Radiology, vol. 308, no. 1, p. e231040, 2023. 2
[13] J. Liu, C. Wang, and S. Liu, “Utility of chatgpt in clinical practice,”
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 25, p. e48568, 2023. 2
[14] L. Yunxiang, L. Zihan, Z. Kai, D. Ruilong, and Z. You, “Chatdoctor:
A medical chat model fine-tuned on llama model using medical domain
knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14070, 2023. 2
[15] H. Xiong, S. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, and D. Shen,
“Doctorglm: Fine-tuning your chinese doctor is not a herculean task,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01097, 2023. 2
[16] H. Wang, C. Liu, N. Xi, Z. Qiang, S. Zhao, B. Qin, and T. Liu, “Huatuo:
Tuning llama model with chinese medical knowledge,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.06975, 2023. 2
[17] K. Singhal, S. Azizi, T. Tu, S. S. Mahdavi, J. Wei, H. W. Chung,
N. Scales, A. Tanwani, H. Cole-Lewis, S. Pfohl et al., “Large language
models encode clinical knowledge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138,
2022. 2
[18] T. H. Kung, M. Cheatham, A. Medinilla, ChatGPT, C. Sillos,
L. De Leon, C. Elepano, M. Madriaga, R. Aggabao, G. Diaz-Candido
et al., “Performance of chatgpt on usmle: Potential for ai-assisted
medical education using large language models,” medRxiv, pp. 2022–
12, 2022. 2
[19] R. S. Porter and J. L. Kaplan, The Merck manual of diagnosis and
therapy.
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., 2011. 2
[20] M. Tsimpoukelli, J. L. Menick, S. Cabi, S. Eslami, O. Vinyals, and
F. Hill, “Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language models,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 200–
212, 2021. 2
[21] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc,
A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds et al., “Flamingo: a visual lan-
guage model for few-shot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198,
2022. 2, 9
[22] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-
image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12597, 2023. 2, 9
[23] O. Thawkar, A. Shaker, S. S. Mullappilly, H. Cholakkal, R. M. Anwer,
S. Khan, J. Laaksonen, and F. S. Khan, “Xraygpt: Chest radiographs
summarization using medical vision-language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.07971, 2023. 2
[24] C. Wu, S. Yin, W. Qi, X. Wang, Z. Tang, and N. Duan, “Visual chatgpt:
Talking, drawing and editing with visual foundation models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.04671, 2023. 2
[25] S. Chang, C. Baian, L. Fangyu, F. Zihao, S. Ehsan, and C. Nigel,
“Visual med-alpaca: A parameter-efficient biomedical llm with visual
capabilities,” github.com/cambridgeltl/visual-med-alpaca/, 2023. 2
[26] S. Zhang, Y. Xu, N. Usuyama, J. Bagga, R. Tinn, S. Preston, R. Rao,
M. Wei, N. Valluri, C. Wong et al., “Large-scale domain-specific
pretraining for biomedical vision-language processing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.00915, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 6, 2023. 3, 7
[27] K. Sparck Jones, “A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its
application in retrieval,” Journal of documentation, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
11–21, 1972. 4
[28] J. L. Bentley, “Multidimensional binary search trees used for associative
searching,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 509–517,
1975. 4
[29] S. Jain, A. Agrawal, A. Saporta, S. Truong, T. Bui, P. Chambon,
Y. Zhang, M. P. Lungren, A. Y. Ng, C. Langlotz et al., “Radgraph: Ex-
tracting clinical entities and relations from radiology reports,” in Thirty-
fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021. 5
[30] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction
to algorithms.
MIT press, 2022. 5
[31] D. Wang, X. Wang, L. Wang, M. Li, Q. Da, X. Liu, X. Gao, J. Shen,
J. He, T. Shen et al., “A real-world dataset and benchmark for foundation
model adaptation in medical image classification,” Scientific Data,
vol. 10, no. 1, p. 574, 2023. 6
[32] K. Panetta, R. Rajendran, A. Ramesh, S. P. Rao, and S. Agaian, “Tufts
dental database: a multimodal panoramic x-ray dataset for benchmarking
diagnostic systems,” IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1650–1659, 2021. 6
[33] P. Chen, L. Gao, X. Shi, K. Allen, and L. Yang, “Fully automatic knee
osteoarthritis severity grading using deep neural networks with a novel
ordinal loss,” Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, vol. 75, pp.
84–92, 2019. 6
[34] I. Moreira, I. Amaral, I. Domingues, A. Cardoso, M. J. Cardoso, and J. S.
Cardoso, “Inbreast: toward a full-field digital mammographic database.”
Academic Radiology, vol. 19, pp. 236–248, 2012. 6
[35] J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, X. He, and P. Xie, “Covid-ct-dataset: a ct scan dataset
about covid-19,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13865, 2020. 6
[36] T. Kauppi, V. Kalesnykiene, J.-K. Kamarainen, L. Lensu, I. Sorri,
A. Raninen, R. Voutilainen, H. Uusitalo, H. K¨alvi¨ainen, and J. Pietil¨a,
“The diaretdb1 diabetic retinopathy database and evaluation protocol.”
in BMVC, vol. 1, no. 1.
Citeseer, 2007, p. 10. 6
[37] D. Gutman, N. C. Codella, E. Celebi, B. Helba, M. Marchetti, N. Mishra,
and A. Halpern, “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A
challenge at the international symposium on biomedical imaging (isbi)
2016, hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration (isic),”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.01397, 2016. 6
[38] A. Acevedo, A. Merino, S. Alf´erez, ´A. Molina, L. Bold´u, and J. Rodellar,
“A dataset of microscopic peripheral blood cell images for development
of automatic recognition systems,” Data in brief, vol. 30, 2020. 6
[39] A. E. Johnson, T. J. Pollard, S. J. Berkowitz, N. R. Greenbaum, M. P.
Lungren, C.-y. Deng, R. G. Mark, and S. Horng, “Mimic-cxr, a de-
identified publicly available database of chest radiographs with free-text
reports,” Scientific data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 317, 2019. 6
[40] K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu, “Bleu: a method for
automatic evaluation of machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 40th
annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002,
pp. 311–318. 6
[41] S. Banerjee and A. Lavie, “Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evalua-
tion with improved correlation with human judgments,” in Proceedings
of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for
machine translation and/or summarization, 2005, pp. 65–72. 6
[42] C.-Y. Lin, “Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries,”
in Text summarization branches out, 2004, pp. 74–81. 6
[43] A. Smit, S. Jain, P. Rajpurkar, A. Pareek, A. Y. Ng, and M. P.
Lungren, “Chexbert: combining automatic labelers and expert annota-
tions for accurate radiology report labeling using bert,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.09167, 2020. 6

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
[44] J. Liu, P. Zhou, Y. Hua, D. Chong, Z. Tian, A. Liu, H. Wang, C. You,
Z. Guo, L. Zhu et al., “Benchmarking large language models on
cmexam-a comprehensive chinese medical exam dataset,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024. 6
[45] Z. Du, Y. Qian, X. Liu, M. Ding, J. Qiu, Z. Yang, and J. Tang,
“Glm: General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank
infilling,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2022, pp. 320–
335. 6, 8, 10
[46] W. Ye, J. Yao, H. Xue, and Y. Li, “Weakly supervised lesion localization
with probabilistic-cam pooling,” 2020. 6
[47] J. Irvin, P. Rajpurkar, M. Ko, Y. Yu, S. Ciurea-Ilcus, C. Chute, H. Mark-
lund, B. Haghgoo, R. Ball, K. Shpanskaya et al., “Chexpert: A large
chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison,”
in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 33,
no. 01, 2019, pp. 590–597. 6
[48] L. Mei, Y. Fang, Z. Cui, K. Deng, N. Wang, X. He, Y. Zhan, X. Zhou,
M. Tonetti, and D. Shen, “Hc-net: Hybrid classification network for
automatic periodontal disease diagnosis,” in International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2023, pp. 54–63. 6
[49] Z. Zhuang, L. Si, S. Wang, K. Xuan, X. Ouyang, Y. Zhan, Z. Xue,
L. Zhang, D. Shen, W. Yao et al., “Knee cartilage defect assessment by
graph representation and surface convolution,” IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging, 2022. 6
[50] W. Lin, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie,
“Pmc-clip: Contrastive language-image pre-training using biomedical
documents,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2023, pp. 525–536. 7
[51] C. Wu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie, “Pmc-llama: Further
finetuning llama on medical papers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14454,
2023. 8, 9
[52] T. Han, L. C. Adams, J.-M. Papaioannou, P. Grundmann, T. Oberhauser,
A. L¨oser, D. Truhn, and K. K. Bressem, “Medalpaca–an open-source
collection of medical conversational ai models and training data,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.08247, 2023. 8
[53] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Mensch, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot,
D. d. l. Casas, F. Bressand, G. Lengyel, G. Lample, L. Saulnier et al.,
“Mistral 7b,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023. 8
[54] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei,
N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al., “Llama
2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288, 2023. 8
[55] X.
Qi,
Y.
Zeng,
T.
Xie,
P.-Y.
Chen,
R.
Jia,
P.
Mittal,
and
P. Henderson, “Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises
safety, even when users do not intend to!” in The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=hTEGyKf0dZ 8
[56] X. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Zhao, W. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie,
“Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question answer-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10415, 2023. 9
[57] C. Wu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie, “Towards generalist
foundation model for radiology,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02463,
2023. 9
[58] S. Zhang and D. Metaxas, “On the challenges and perspectives of
foundation models for medical image analysis,” Medical Image Analysis,
p. 102996, 2023. 9
[59] langchain ChatGLM Contributors, “Chatglm application with lo-
cal knowledge implementation,” https://github.com/imClumsyPanda/
langchain-ChatGLM, 2023. 10, 11
